Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 36 (2009) 307-340

Submitted 06/09; published 11/09

Cross-lingual Annotation Projection of Semantic Roles
Sebastian Pado

pado@ims.uni-stuttgart.de

Institut fur maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung
Universitat Stuttgart, 70174 Stuttgart, Germany

Mirella Lapata

mlap@inf.ed.ac.uk

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh EH8 10 AB, UK

Abstract
This article considers the task of automatically inducing role-semantic annotations in
the FrameNet paradigm for new languages. We propose a general framework that is based
on annotation projection, phrased as a graph optimization problem. It is relatively inexpensive and has the potential to reduce the human effort involved in creating role-semantic
resources. Within this framework, we present projection models that exploit lexical and
syntactic information. We provide an experimental evaluation on an English-German parallel corpus which demonstrates the feasibility of inducing high-precision German semantic
role annotation both for manually and automatically annotated English data.

1. Introduction
Semantic roles play a prominent role in linguistic theory (Fillmore, 1968; Jackendoff, 1990;
Dowty, 1991). They describe the relations that hold between a predicate and its arguments,
abstracting over surface syntactic configurations. As an example, consider sentences (1a)
and (1b) where butter is uniformly assigned the semantic role Undergoer (since it undergoes a physical change) even though it is syntactically realized as the object of the verb
melt in (1a) and its subject in (1b):
(1)

a.
b.

[Bob]Agent melted [the butter]Undergoer .
[The butter]Undergoer melted.

This intermediate representation seems a promising first step towards text understanding,
and can ultimately benefit many natural language processing tasks that require broad coverage semantic processing.
Methods for the automatic identification and labeling of semantic roles, often referred to
as shallow semantic parsing (Gildea & Jurafsky, 2002), are an important prerequisite for the
widespread use of semantic role information in large-scale applications. The development
of shallow semantic parsers1 has been greatly facilitated by the availability of resources like
FrameNet (Fillmore, Johnson, & Petruck, 2003) and PropBank (Palmer, Gildea, & Kingsbury, 2005), which document possible surface realization of semantic roles. Indeed, semantic
1. Approaches to building shallow semantic parsers are too numerous to list. We refer the interested reader
to the proceedings of the 2005 CoNLL shared task (Carreras & Marquez, 2005) and to the 2008 Computational Linguistics Special Issue on Semantic Role Labeling (Marquez, Carreras, Litkowski, & Stevenson,
2008) for an overview of the state-of-the-art.
c
2009
AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

fiPado & Lapata

Departing
An object (the Theme) moves away from a Source.
Theme

The officer left the house.
The plane leaves at seven.
His departure was delayed.

Source

We departed from New York.
He retreated from his opponent.
The woman left the house.

FEEs

abandon.v, desert.v, depart.v, departure.n,
emerge.v, emigrate.v, emigration.n, escape.v,
escape.n, leave.v, quit.v, retreat.v, retreat.n,
split.v, withdraw.v, withdrawal.n

Table 1: Abbreviated FrameNet entry for the Departing frame
roles have recently found use in applications ranging from information extraction (Surdeanu,
Harabagiu, Williams, & Aarseth, 2003) to the modeling of textual entailment relations (Tatu
& Moldovan, 2005; Burchardt & Frank, 2006), text categorization (Moschitti, 2008), question answering (Narayanan & Harabagiu, 2004; Frank, Krieger, Xu, Uszkoreit, Crysmann,
Jorg, & Schafer, 2007; Moschitti, Quarteroni, Basili, & Manandhar, 2007; Shen & Lapata,
2007), machine translation (Wu & Fung, 2009a, 2009b) and its evaluation (Gimenez &
Marquez, 2007).
In the FrameNet paradigm, the meaning of a predicate (usually a verb, noun, or adjective) is represented by reference to a frame, a prototypical representation of the situation
the predicate describes (Fillmore, 1982). The semantic roles, which are called frame elements, correspond to entities present in this situation, and are therefore frame-specific. For
each frame, the English FrameNet database2 lists the predicates that can evoke it (called
frame-evoking elements or FEEs), gives the possible syntactic realizations of its semantic
roles, and provides annotated examples from the British National Corpus (Burnard, 2000).
An abbreviated example definition of the Departing frame is shown in Table 1. The semantic roles are illustrated with example sentences and the FEEs are shown at the bottom
of the table (e.g., abandon, desert, depart). The PropBank corpus, the second major semantic role resource for English, provides role realization information for verbs in a similar
manner on the Wall Street Journal portion of the Penn Treebank. It uses index-based role
names (Arg0Argn), where Arg0 and Arg1 correspond to Dowtys (1991) proto-agent and
proto-patient. Higher indices are defined on a verb-by-verb basis.
Unfortunately, resources such as FrameNet and PropBank are largely absent for almost
all languages except English, the main reason being that role-semantic annotation is an
expensive and time-consuming process. The current English FrameNet (Version 1.3) has
been developed over the past twelve years. It now contains roughly 800 frames covering
2. Available from http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu.

308

fiCross-lingual Annotation Projection for Semantic Roles

around 150,000 annotated tokens of 7,000 frame-evoking elements. Although FrameNets
are being constructed for German, Spanish, and Japanese, these resources are considerably
smaller. The same is true for PropBank-style resources, which have been developed for
Korean3 , Chinese (Xue & Palmer, 2009), Spanish and Catalan (Taule, Mart, & Recasens,
2008). Compared to the English PropBank, which covers 113,000 predicate-argument structures, the resources for the other languages are two to three times smaller (e.g., the Korean
PropBank provides 33,000 annotations).
Given the data requirements for supervised learning algorithms (Fleischman & Hovy,
2003) and the current paucity of such data, unsupervised methods could potentially enable
the creation of annotated data for new languages and reduce the human effort involved.
However, unsupervised approaches to shallow semantic parsing are still at an early stage,
and mostly applicable to resources other than FrameNet (Swier & Stevenson, 2004, 2005;
Grenager & Manning, 2006). In this article, we propose a method which employs parallel
corpora for acquiring frame elements and their syntactic realizations for new languages (see
the upper half of Table 1). Our approach leverages the existing English FrameNet to overcome the resource shortage in other languages by exploiting the translational equivalences
present in aligned data. Specifically, it uses annotation projection (Yarowsky, Ngai, & Wicentowski, 2001; Yarowsky & Ngai, 2001; Hwa, Resnik, Weinberg, & Kolak, 2002; Hi &
Hwa, 2005) to transfer semantic roles from English to less resource-rich languages. The key
idea of projection can be summarized as follows: (1) given a pair of sentences E (English)
and L (new language) that are translations of each other, annotate E with semantic roles;
and then (2) project these roles onto L using word alignment information. In this manner,
we induce semantic structure on the L side of the parallel text, which can then serve as
data for training a shallow semantic parser for L that is independent of the parallel corpus.
The annotation projection paradigm faces at least two challenges when considering semantic roles. Firstly, the semantic structure to be projected must be shared between the two
sentences. Clearly, if the role-semantic analysis of the source sentence E is inappropriate for
the target sentence L, simple projection will not produce valid semantic role annotations.
Secondly, even if two sentences demonstrate semantic parallelism, semantic role annotations
pertain to potentially arbitrarily long word spans rather than to individual words. Recovering the word span of the semantic roles in the target language is challenging given that
automatic alignment methods often produce noisy or incomplete alignments.
We address the first challenge by showing that, if two languages exhibit a substantial
degree of semantic correspondence, then annotation projection is feasible. Using an EnglishGerman parallel corpus as a test bed, we assess whether English semantic role annotations
can be transferred successfully onto German. We find that the two languages exhibit a
degree of semantic correspondence substantial enough to warrant projection. We tackle the
second challenge by presenting a framework for the projection of semantic role annotations
that goes beyond single word alignments. Specifically, we construct semantic alignments
between constituents of source and target sentences and formalize the search for the best
semantic alignment as an optimization problem in a bipartite graph. We argue that bipartite
graphs offer a flexible and intuitive framework for modeling semantic alignments that is able
to deal with noise and to represent translational divergences. We present different classes
3. The Korean PropBank is available from the LDC (http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/).

309

fiPado & Lapata

of models with varying assumptions regarding admissible correspondences between source
and target constituents. Experimental results demonstrate that constituent-based models
outperform their word-based alternatives by a large margin.4
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses annotation
projection in general and presents an annotation study examining the degree of semantic
parallelism on an English-German corpus. In Section 3, we formalize semantic alignments
and present our modeling framework. Our experiments are detailed in Section 4. We review
related work in Section 5 and conclude the article with discussion of future work (Section 6).

2. Annotation Projection and Semantic Correspondence
In recent years, interest has grown in parallel corpora for multilingual and cross-lingual
natural language processing. Beyond machine translation, parallel corpora can be exploited
to relieve the effort involved in creating annotations for new languages. One important
paradigm, annotation projection, creates new monolingual resources by transferring annotations from English (or other resource-rich languages) onto resource-scarce languages
through the use of word alignments. The resulting (noisy) annotations can be then used
in conjunction with robust learning algorithms to obtain NLP tools such as taggers and
chunkers relatively cheaply. The projection approach has been successfully used to transfer a wide range of linguistic annotations between languages. Examples include parts of
speech (Yarowsky et al., 2001; Hi & Hwa, 2005), chunks (Yarowsky et al., 2001), dependencies (Hwa et al., 2002), word senses (Diab & Resnik, 2002; Bentivogli & Pianta, 2005),
information extraction markup (Riloff, Schafer, & Yarowsky, 2002), coreference chains (Postolache, Cristea, & Orasan, 2006), temporal information (Spreyer & Frank, 2008), and LFG
f-structures (Tokarczyk & Frank, 2009).
An important assumption underlying annotation projection is that linguistic analyses
in one language will be also valid in another language. It is however unrealistic to expect
any two languages, even of the same family, to be in perfect correspondence. There are
many well-studied systematic differences across languages often referred to as translational
divergences (van Leuven-Zwart, 1989; Dorr, 1995). These can be structural, where the same
semantic content in the source and in the target language can be realized using different
structures, or semantic, where the content itself undergoes a change in translation. Translational divergences (in conjunction with poor alignments) are a major stumbling block
towards achieving accurate projections. Yarowsky and Ngai (2001) find that parts of speech
that are transferred directly from English onto French contain considerable noise, even in
cases where inaccurate automatic alignments have been manually corrected (accuracies vary
between 69% and 78% depending on tagset granularity). For syntax, Hwa, Resnik, Weinberg, Cabezas, and Kolak (2005) find that only 37% of English dependency relations have
direct counterparts in Chinese, and 38% in Spanish. The problem is commonly addressed
with filtering mechanisms, which act as a post-processing step on the projection output.
For example, Yarowsky and Ngai (2001) exclude infrequent projections and poor alignments
4. A preliminary version of this work was published in the proceedings of EMNLP 2005 and COLING/ACL
2006. The current article contains a more detailed description of our approach, presents several novel
experiments, and a comprehensive error analysis.

310

fiCross-lingual Annotation Projection for Semantic Roles

and Hwa et al. (2005) apply transformation rules which encode linguistic knowledge about
the target language.
In the case of semantic frames there is reason for optimism. By definition, frames are
based on conceptual structure (Fillmore, 1982). The latter constitute generalizations over
surface structure and therefore ought to be less prone to syntactic variation. Indeed, efforts
to develop FrameNets manually in German, Japanese, and Spanish reveal that a large
number of English frames can be re-used directly to describe predicates and their arguments
in other languages (Ohara, Fujii, Saito, Ishizaki, Ohori, & Suzuki, 2003; Subirats & Petruck,
2003; Burchardt, Erk, Frank, Kowalski, Pado, & Pinkal, 2009). Boas (2005) even suggests
frame semantics as an interlingual meaning representation.
Computational studies on projection in parallel corpora have also obtained good results
for semantic annotation. Fung and Chen (2004) induce FrameNet-style annotations in Chinese by mapping English FrameNet entries directly onto concepts listed in HowNet5 , an
on-line ontology for Chinese, without using parallel texts. In their experiment, they transfer
semantic roles from English to Chinese with an accuracy of 68%. Basili, Cao, Croce, Coppola, and Moschitti (2009) use gold standard annotations to transfer semantic roles from
English to Italian with 73% accuracy. Bentivogli and Pianta (2005) project EuroWordNet
sense tags, which represent more fine-grained semantic information than FrameNet, also
from English to Italian. They obtain a precision of 88% and a recall of 71%, without applying any filtering. Fung, Wu, Yang, and Wu (2006, 2007) analyse an automatically annotated
EnglishChinese parallel corpus and find high cross-lingual agreement for PropBank roles
(in the range of 75%95%, depending on the role).
To provide a sound empirical justification for our projection-based approach, we conducted a manual annotation study on a parallel English-German corpus. We identified
semantic role information in bi-sentences and assessed the degree to which frames and semantic roles agree and diverge in English and German. The degree of divergence provides
a natural upper bound for the accuracy attainable with annotation projection.
2.1 Sample Selection
English-German bi-sentences were drawn from the second release of Europarl (Koehn, 2005),
a corpus of professionally translated proceedings of the European Parliament. Europarl is
aligned at the document and sentence level and is available in 11 languages. The English
German section contains about 25 million words on both sides. Even though restricted in
genre (transcriptions of spoken text), Europarl is fairly open-domain, covering a wide range
of topics such as foreign politics, cultural and economic affairs, and procedural matters.
A naive sampling strategy would involve randomly selecting bi-sentences from Europarl
which contain a FrameNet predicate on the English side aligned to some word on the
German side. There are two caveats here. First, the alignment between the two predicates
may be wrong, leading us to assign a wrong frame to the German predicate. Secondly, even
if the alignment is accurate, it is possible that a randomly chosen English predicate evokes
a frame that is not yet covered by FrameNet. For example, FrameNet 1.3 documents the
receive sense of the verb accept (as in the sentence Mary accepted a gift), but has no
entry for the admit sense of the predicate (e.g., in I accept that this is a problem for
5. See http://www.keenage.com/zhiwang/e_zhiwang.html.

311

fiPado & Lapata

Measure
Frame Match
Role Match
Span Match

English
89.7
94.9
84.4

German
86.7
95.2
83.0

All
88.2
95.0
83.7

Table 2: Monolingual inter-annotator agreement on the calibration set

the EU ) which is relatively frequent in Europarl. Indeed, in a pilot study, we inspected a
small random sample consisting of 100 bi-sentences, using the publicly available GIZA++
software (Och & Ney, 2003) to induce English-German word alignments. We found that 25%
of the English predicates did not have readings documented in FrameNet, and an additional
9% of the predicate pairs were instances of wrong alignments. In order to obtain a cleaner
sample, our final sampling procedure was informed by the English FrameNet and SALSA,
a FrameNet-compatible database, for German (Erk, Kowalski, Pado, & Pinkal, 2003).
We gathered all GermanEnglish sentences in the corpus that had at least one pair of
GIZA++-aligned predicates (we , wg ), where we was listed in FrameNet and wg in SALSA,
and where the intersection of the two frame lists for wg and we was non-empty. This corpus
contains 83 frame types, 696 lemma pairs, and 265 unique English and 178 unique German
lemmas. Sentence pairs were grouped into three bands according to their frame frequency
(High, Medium, Low). We randomly selected 380 pairs from each band for annotation.
The total sample consisted of 1,140 bi-sentences. Before semantic annotation took place,
constituency parses for the corpus were obtained from Collins (1997) parser for English and
Dubeys (2005) for German. The automatic parses were then corrected manually, following
the annotation guidelines of the Penn Treebank (English) and the TIGER corpus (German).
2.2 Annotation
After syntactic correction, two annotators with native-level proficiency in German and English annotated each bi-sentence with the frames evoked by we and wg and their semantic
roles (i.e., one frame per monolingual sentence). For every predicate, the task involved two
steps: (a) selecting the appropriate frame and (b) assigning the instantiated semantic roles
to sentence constituents. Annotators were provided with detailed guidelines that explained
the task with multiple examples.
The annotation took place on the gold standard parsed corpus and proceeded in three
phases: a training phase (40 bi-sentences), a calibration phase (100 bi-sentences), and a
production mode phase (1000 bi-sentences). During training, annotators were acquainted
with the annotation style. In the calibration phase, each bi-sentence was doubly annotated to
assess inter-annotator agreement. Finally, in production mode, each of the 1000 bi-sentences
in the main dataset was split and each half randomly assigned to one of the coders for
single annotation. We thus ensured that no annotator saw both parts of any bi-sentence
to avoid any language bias in the role assignment (annotators may be prone to label an
English sentence similar to its German translation and vice versa). Each coder annotated
approximately the same amount of data in English and German and had access to the
FrameNet and SALSA resources.
312

fiCross-lingual Annotation Projection for Semantic Roles

Measure
Frame Match
Role Match

Precision
71.6
90.5

Recall
71.6
92.3

F1-Score
71.6
91.4

Table 3: Semantic parallelism between English and German
The results of our inter-annotator agreement study are given in Table 2. The widely used
Kappa statistic is not directly applicable to our task as it requires a fixed set of items to be
classified into a fixed set of categories. In our case, however, there are no fixed items, since the
span for the frame elements can have any length. In addition, the categories (i.e., frames and
roles) are predicate-specific, and vary from item to item (for a discussion of this issue, see also
the work of Miltsakaki et al., 2004). Instead, we compute three different agreement measures
defined as: the ratio of common frames between two sentences (Frame Match), the ratio of
common roles (Role Match), and the ratio of roles with identical spans (Span Match). As
shown in Table 2, annotators tend to agree in frame assignment; disagreements are mainly
due to fuzzy distinctions between closely related frames (e.g., between Awareness and
Certainty). Annotators also agree on what roles to assign and on identifying role spans.
Overall, we obtain high agreement for all aspects of the annotation, which indicates that
the task is well-defined. We are not aware of published agreement figures on the English
FrameNet annotations, but our results are comparable to numbers reported by Burchardt,
Erk, Frank, Kowalski, Pado, and Pinkal (2006) for German, viz. 85% agreement on frame
assignment (Frame Match) and 86% agreement on role annotation.6
2.3 Evaluation
Recall that the main dataset consists of 1,000 English-German bi-sentences annotated with
FrameNet semantic roles. Since the annotations for each language have been created independently, they can be used to provide an estimate of the degree of semantic parallelism
between the two languages. We measured parallelism using precision and recall, treating
the German annotations as gold standard. This evaluation scheme directly gauges the usability of English as a source language for annotation projection. Less than 100% recall
means that the target language has frames or roles which are not present in English and
cannot be retrieved by annotation projection. Conversely, imperfect precision indicates that
there are English frames or roles whose projection yields erroneous annotations in the target language. Frames and roles are counted as matching if they occur in both halves of a
bi-sentence, regardless of their role spans, which are not comparable across languages.
As shown in Table 3, about 72% of the time English and German evoke the same
frame (Frame Match). This result is encouraging, especially when considering that frame
disagreements also arise within a single language as demonstrated by our inter-annotator
study on the calibration set (see the row Frame Match in Table 2). However, it also indicates
that there is a non-negligible number of cases of translational divergence on the frame level.
These are often cases where one language chooses a single predicate to express a situation
whereas the other one uses complex predication. In the following example, the English
transitive predicate increase evokes the frame Cause change of scalar position (An
6. The parallel corpus we created is available from http://nlpado.de/~sebastian/srl_data.html.

313

fiPado & Lapata

agent or cause increases the position of a variable on some scale). Its German translation
fuhrt zu hoheren (leads to higher) combines the Causation frame evoked by fuhren with
the inchoative Change of scalar position frame introduced by hoher :
(2)

This will increase the level of employment.
Dies wird zu einer hoheren Erwebsquote
fuhren.
This will to a
higher
level of employment lead

At the level of semantic roles, agreement (Role Match) reaches an F1-Score of 91%. This
means that when frames correspond across languages, the roles agree to a large extent.
Role mismatches are frequently cases of passivization or infinitival constructions leading
to role elision. In the example below, remembered and denkt both evoke the Memory
frame. English uses a passive construction which leaves the deep subject position unfilled.
In contrast, German uses an active construction where the deep subject position is filled by
a semantically light pronoun, man (one).
(3)

I ask that [Ireland]Content be remembered.
Ich mochte
darum bitten, dass [man]Cognizer [an Irland]Content denkt.
I would like
to ask that one
of Ireland
thinks

In sum, we find that there is substantial cross-lingual semantic correspondence between
English and German provided that the predicates evoke the same frame. We enlisted the
help of the SALSA database to meet this requirement. Alternatively, we could have used an
existing bilingual dictionary (Fung & Chen, 2004), aligned the frames automatically using a
vector-based representation (Basili et al., 2009) or inferred FrameNet-style predicate labels
for German following the approach proposed by Pado and Lapata (2005).

3. Modeling Semantic Role Projection with Semantic Alignments
Most previous work on projection relies on word alignments to transfer annotations between
languages. This is not surprising, since the annotations of interest are often defined at the
word level (e.g., parts of speech, word senses, or dependencies) and rarely span more than
one token. In contrast, semantic roles can cover sentential constituents of arbitrary length,
and simply using word alignments for projection is likely to result in wrong role spans.
As an example, consider the bi-sentence in Figure 1.7 Assume for now that the (English) source has been annotated with semantic roles which we wish to project onto the
(German) target. Although some alignments (indicated by the dotted lines below the sentence) are accurate (e.g., promised  versprach, to  zu), others are noisy or incomplete
(e.g., time  punktlich instead of on time  punktlich). Based on these alignments, the
Message role would be projected into German onto the (incorrect) word span punktlich zu
instead of punktlich zu kommen, since kommen is not aligned with any English word.
It is of course possible to devise heuristics for amending alignment errors. However, this
process does not scale well: different heuristics need to be created for different errors, and
7. A literal gloss of the German sentence is Kim promises timely to come.

314

fiCross-lingual Annotation Projection for Semantic Roles

S

NP SPEAKER

S
VP

NP SPEAKER

VP
S MESSAGE

S MESSAGE
Kim promised to be on time

Kim versprach, pnktlich zu kommen

Figure 1: Bilingual projection of semantic role information with semantic alignments between constituents.

the process has to be repeated for each new language pair. Instead, our projection model
alleviates this problem in a more principled manner by taking constituency information into
account. Specifically, we induce semantic alignments between source and target sentences
by relying on syntactic constituents to introduce a bias towards linguistically meaningful
spans. For a constituent to be aligned correctly, it is sufficient that a subset of its yield
is correctly word-aligned. So, in Figure 1, we can align to be on time with punktlich zu
kommen and project the role Message accurately, despite the fact that be and kommen are
not aligned with each other. In the following, we describe in detail how semantic alignments
are computed and subsequently guide projection onto the target language.
3.1 Framework Formalization
Each bi-sentence is represented as a set of linguistic units. These are distinguished into
source (us  Us ) and target (ut  Ut ) units and can be words, chunks, constituents, or other
groupings. The semantic roles for the source sentence are modeled as a labeling function
as : R  2Us which maps roles to sets of source units. We view projection as the construction
of a similar role labeling function on the target sentence, at : R  2Ut . Without loss of
generality, we limit ourselves to one frame per sentence, as does FrameNet.8
A semantic alignment A between Us and Ut is a subset of the Cartesian product of the
source and target units:
A  Us  Ut
(4)
An alignment link between us  Us and ut  Ut implies that us and ut are semantically
equivalent. Provided with A and the role assignment function for the source sentence, as ,
projection consists simply of transferring the source labels r onto the union of the target
units that are semantically aligned with the source units bearing the label r:
at (r) = {ut k  us  as (r) : (us , ut )  A}

(5)

8. This entails that we cannot take advantage of potentially beneficial dependencies between the arguments of different predicates within one sentence, which have been shown to improve semantic role
labeling (Carreras, Marquez, & Chrupala, 2004).

315

fiPado & Lapata

We phrase the search for a semantic alignment A as an optimization problem. Specifically,
we seek the alignment that maximizes the product of bilingual similarities sim between
source and target units:
Y
sim(us , ut )
(6)
A = argmax
AA

(us ,ut )A

There are several well-established methods in the literature for computing semantic similarity within one language (see the work of Weeds, 2003, and Budanitsky & Hirst, 2006,
for overviews). Measuring semantic similarity across languages is not as well studied and
there is less consensus on what the appropriate methods are. In this article, we employ a
very simple method, using automatic word alignments as a proxy for semantic equivalence;
however, other similarity measures can be used (see the discussion in Section 6). Following
general convention, we assume that sim is a function ranging from 0 (minimal similarity)
to 1 (maximal similarity).
A wealth of optimization methods can be used to solve (6). In this article, we treat
constituent alignment as a bipartite graph optimization problem. Bipartite graphs provide
a simple and intuitive modeling framework for alignment problems and their optimization algorithms are well-understood and computationally moderate. More importantly, by
imposing constraints on the bipartite graph, we can bias our model against linguistically
implausible alignments, for example alignments that map multiple English roles onto a single German constituent. Different graph topologies correspond to different constraints on
the set of admissible alignments A. For instance, we may want to ensure that all source and
target units are aligned, or to restrict alignment to one-to-one matches (see Section 3.3 for
further details).
More formally, a weighted bipartite graph is a graph G = (V, E) whose node set V is
partitioned into two nonempty sets V1 and V2 in such a way that every edge E joins a
node in V1 to a node in V2 and is labeled with a weight. In our projection application, the
two partitions are the sets of linguistic units Us and Ut , in the source and target sentence,
respectively. We assume that G is complete, that is, each source node is connected to all
target nodes and vice versa.9 Edge weights model the (dis-)similarity between a pair of
source and target units.
The optimization problem from Equation (6) identifies the alignment that maximizes the
product of link similarities which are equivalent to edges in our bipartite graph. Finding an
optimal alignment amounts to identifying a minimum-weight subgraph (Cormen, Leiserson,
& Rivest, 1990)  a subgraph G0 of G that satisfies certain structural constraints (see the
discussion below) while incurring a minimal edge cost:
A = argmin
AA

X

weight(us , ut )

(7)

(us ,ut )A

The minimization problem in Equation (7) is equivalent to the maximization problem in (6)
when setting weight(us , ut ) to:
weight(us , ut ) =  log sim(us , ut )
9. Unwanted alignments can be excluded explicitly by setting their similarity to zero.

316

(8)

fiCross-lingual Annotation Projection for Semantic Roles

S4

S'4
VP2

NP3

NP'3

S1

Kim promised to be on time

VP'2
S'1

Kim versprach, pnktlich zu kommen

(a) Bi-sentence with word alignments

S1
VP2
NP3
S4

S01
0.58
0.45
0
0.37

VP02
0.45
0.68
0
0.55

NP03
0
0
1
0.18

S04
0.37
0.55
0.18
0.73

S1
VP2
NP3
S4

(b) Constituent Similarities

S01
0.54
0.80

1.00

VP02
0.80
0.39

0.60

NP03


0
1.70

S04
1.00
0.60
1.70
0.31

(c) Edge weights

Figure 2: Example of bi-sentence represented as an edge weight matrix
As an example, consider Figure 2. It shows the bi-sentence from Figure 1 and its representation as an edge weight matrix for the corresponding complete bipartite graph. The nodes of
the graph (S1 S4 for source side and S01 S04 for target side) model the sentential constituents.
The numbers in Figure 2b are similarity scores, the corresponding edge weights are shown in
Figure 2c. High similarity scores correspond to low edge weights. Edges with zero similarity
are set to infinity (in practice, to a very large number). Finally, notice that alignments with
high similarity scores (low edge weights) occur in the diagonal of the matrix.
In order to obtain complete projection models we must (a) specify the linguistic units
over which alignment takes place; (b) define an appropriate similarity function; and (c)
formulate the alignment constraints. In the following, we describe two models, one that
uses words as linguistic units and one that uses constituents. We also present appropriate
similarity functions for these models and detail our alignment constraints.
3.2 Word-based Projection
In our first model the linguistic units are word tokens. Source and target sentences are represented by sets of words, Us = {ws1 , ws2 , . . . } and Ut = {wt1 , wt2 , . . . }, respectively. Semantic
alignments here are links between individual words. We can thus conveniently interpret
off-the-shelf word alignments as semantic alignments. Formally, this is achieved with the
following binary similarity function, which trivially turns a word alignment into an optimal
semantic alignment.
(
1 if ws and wt are word-aligned
sim(ws , wt ) =
(9)
0 else
Constraints on admissible alignments are often encoded in word alignment models either
heuristically (e.g., by enforcing one-to-one alignments as in Melamed, 2000) or by virtue of
317

fiPado & Lapata

the translation model used for their computation. For example, the IBM models introduced
in the seminal work of Brown, Pietra, Pietra, and Mercer (1993) require each target word to
be aligned to exactly one source word (which may be the empty word), and therefore allow
one-to-many alignments in one direction. Our experiments use the alignments induced by
the publicly available GIZA++ software (Och & Ney, 2003). GIZA++ yields alignments
by interfacing the IBM models 14 (Brown et al., 1993) with HMM extensions of models 1
and 2 (Vogel, Ney, & Tillmann, 1996). This particular configuration has been shown to
outperform several heuristic and statistical alignment models (Och & Ney, 2003). We thus
take advantage of the alignment constraints already encoded in GIZA++ and assume that
the optimal semantic alignment is given by the set of GIZA++ links. The resulting target
language labeling function is:
aw
t (r) = {wt k  ws  as (r) : ws and wt are GIZA++ word-aligned}

(10)

This labeling function corresponds to the (implicit) labeling functions employed in other
word-based annotation projection models. Such models can be easily derived for different
language pairs without recourse to any corpus-external resources. Unfortunately, as discussed in Section 2, automatically induced alignments are often noisy, thus leading to
projection errors. Cases in point are function words (e.g., prepositions) and multi-word
expressions, which are systematically misaligned due to their high degree of cross-lingual
variation.
3.3 Constituent-based Projection
In our second model the linguistic units are constituents. Source and target sentences
are thus represented by constituent sets (Us = {c1s , c2s , . . . }) and (Ut = {c1t , c2t , . . . }). A
constituent-based similarity function should capture the extent to which cs and its projection ct express the same semantic content. We approximate this by measuring word
alignment-based word overlap between cs and ct with Jaccards coefficient.
Let yield(c) denote the set of words in the yield of a constituent c, and al(c) the set of
words in the target language aligned to the yield of c. Then the word overlap o between a
source constituent cs and a target constituent ct is defined as:
o(cs , ct ) =

|al(cs )  yield(ct )|
|al(cs )  yield(ct )|

(11)

Jaccards coefficient is asymmetric: it will consider how well the projection of a source
constituent al(cs ) matches the target constituent ct , but not vice versa. In order to take
target-source and source-target correspondences into account, we measure word overlap in
both directions and use their mean as a measure of similarity:
sim(cs , ct ) = (o(cs , ct ) + o(ct , cs ))/2

(12)

In addition to a similarity measure, a constituent-based projection model must also specify
the constraints that characterize the set of admissible alignments A. In this paper, we
consider three types of alignment constraints that affect the number of alignment links per
constituent (in graph-theoretic terms, the degree of the nodes in Us ). This focus is motivated
318

fiCross-lingual Annotation Projection for Semantic Roles

Us

Ut

1

1

2

2

r2

3

3

r2

4

4

5

e

5

5

6

e

6

6

r1

(a) Perfect matching

Us

Ut

1

1

2

2

r2

3

3

r2

4

4

r1
r1
r2

(b) Edge cover

Us

Ut

1

1

2

2

r2

3

3

r2

4

4

r1
r1
r2

r1
r2

(c) Total alignment

Figure 3: Constituent alignments and role projections resulting from three families of alignment constraints (Us , Ut : source and target constituents; r1 , r2 : semantic roles).

by patterns that we observe on our gold standard corpus (cf. Section 2). For each English
and German constituent, we determined whether it corresponded to none, exactly one, or
several constituents in the other language, according to a gold standard word alignment.
The majority of constituents correspond to exactly one constituent (67%), followed by a
substantial number of one-to-many/many-to-one correspondences (32%), while cases where
constituents are not translated (i.e., do not have a corresponding node on the other side of
the bi-sentence) are very rare (1%).
This analysis indicates that on perfect data, we should expect the best performance from
a model that allows one-to-many alignments. However, it is a common finding in machine
learning that more restrictive models, even though not appropriate for the data at hand,
yield better results by limiting the hypothesis space. In this spirit, we compare three families
of admissible alignments which range from the more restrictive to the more permissive, and
evaluate them against each other.
3.3.1 Alignments as Perfect Matchings
We first consider the most restrictive case, where each constituent has exactly one adjacent
alignment edge. Semantic alignments with this property can be thought of as bijective
functions: each source constituent is mapped to one target constituent, and vice versa. The
resulting bipartite graphs are perfect matchings. An example of a perfect bipartite matching
is given in Figure 3a. Note that the target side contains two nodes labeled (e), a shorthand
for empty node. Since bi-sentences will often differ in size, the resulting graph partitions
will have different sizes as well. In such cases, we introduce empty nodes in the smaller
partition to enable perfect matching. Empty nodes are assigned a similarity of zero with
all other nodes. Alignments to empty nodes (such as for source nodes (3) and (6)) are
ignored for the purposes of projection; this gives the model the possibility of abstaining
from aligning a node when no good correspondence is found.
Perfect matchings assume a strong equivalence between the constituent structures of
the two languages; neither of the alignments in Figure 3(b) and 3(c) is a perfect matching.
319

fiPado & Lapata

Perfect matchings cannot model one-to-many matches, i.e., cases where semantic material
expressed by one constituent in one language is split into two constituents in the other
language. This means that perfect matchings are most appropriate when the source and
target role annotations span exactly one constituent. While this is not always the case,
perfect matchings also have an advantage over more expressive models: by allowing each
node only one adjacent edge, they introduce strong competition between edges. As a result,
errors in the word alignment can be corrected to some extent.
Perfect matchings can be computed efficiently using algorithms for network optimization (Fredman & Tarjan, 1987) in time approximately cubic in the total number of constituents in a bi-sentence (O(|Us |2 log |Us | + |Us |2 |Ut |)). Furthermore, perfect matchings are
equivalent to the well-known linear assignment problem, for which many solution algorithms
have been developed (e.g., Jonker and Volgenant 1987, time O(max(|Us |, |Ut |)3 )).
3.3.2 Alignments as Edge Covers
We next consider edge covers, a generalization of perfect matchings. Edge covers are bipartite graphs where each source and target constituent is adjacent to at least one edge. This is
illustrated in Figure 3b, where all source and target nodes have one adjacent edge (i.e., alignment link), and some nodes more than one (see source node (2) and target node (4)). Edge
covers impose weaker correspondence assumptions than perfect matchings, since they allow one-to-many alignments between constituents in either direction.10 So, in theory, edge
covers have a higher chance of delivering a correct role projection than perfect matchings
when the syntactic structures of the source and target sentences are different. They can also
deal better with situations where semantic roles are assigned to more than one constituent
in one of the languages (cf. source nodes (3) and (4), labeled with role r2 , in the example
graph). Notice that perfect matchings as shown in Figure 3a are also edge covers, whereas
the graph in Figure 3c is not, as the target-side nodes (1) and (3) have no adjacent edges.
Eiter and Mannila (1997) develop an algorithm for computing optimal edge covers.
They show that minimum-weight edge covers can be reduced to minimum weight perfect
matchings (see above) of an auxiliary bipartite graph with two partitions of size |Us | + |Ut |.
This allows the computation of minimum weight edge covers in time O((|Us | + |Ut |)3 ) =
O(max(|Us |, |Ut |)3 ), which is also cubic in the number of constituents in the bi-sentence.
3.3.3 Total Alignments
The last family of admissible alignments we consider are total alignments. Here, each source
constituent is linked to some target constituent (i.e.,the alignment forms a total function
on the source nodes). Total alignments do not impose any constraints on the target nodes,
which can therefore be linked to an arbitrary number of source nodes, including none. Total
alignments are the most permissive alignment class. In contrast to perfect matchings and
edge covers, constituents in the target sentence can be left unaligned. Total alignments can
10. The general definition of edge covers also allows many-to-many alignments. However, optimal edge covers
according to Equation (7) cannot be many-to-many, since the weight of edge covers with many-to-many
alignments can never be minimal: From each many-to-many edge cover, one edge can be removed,
resulting in an edge cover with a lower weight.

320

fiCross-lingual Annotation Projection for Semantic Roles

be computed by linking each source node to its maximally similar target node:
At = {(cs , ct ) | cs  Us  ct = argmax sim(cs , c0t )}

(13)

c0t Ut

Due to the independence of source nodes, this local optimization results in a globally optimal
alignment. The time complexity of this procedure is quadratic in the number of constituents,
O(|Us ||Ut |).
An example is shown in Figure 3c, where source constituents (1) and (2) correspond
to target constituent (2), and source constituents (3)(6) correspond to (4). Target constituents (1) and (3) are not aligned. The quality of total alignments relies heavily on
the underlying word alignment. Since there is little competition between edges, there is a
tendency to form alignments mostly with high (similarity) scoring target constituents. In
practice, this means that potentially important, but idiosyncratic, target constituents with
low similarity scores will be left unaligned.
3.4 Noise Reduction
As discussed in Section 2, noise elimination techniques are an integral part of projection
architectures. Although our constituent-based model will not be overly sensitive to noise 
we expect the syntactic information to compensate for alignment errors  the word-based
model will be more error-prone since it relies solely on automatically obtained alignments
for transferring semantic roles. Below we introduce three filtering techniques that either
correct or discard erroneous projections.
3.4.1 Filling-the-gaps
According to our definition of projection in Equation (5), the span of a projected role r
corresponds to the union of all target units that are aligned to source units labeled with r.
This definition is sufficient for constituent-based projection models, where roles rarely span
more than one constituent but will yield many wrong alignments for word-based models
where roles will typically span several source units (i.e., words). Due to errors and gaps in
the word alignment, the target span of a role will often be a non-contiguous set of words.
We can repair non-contiguous projections where the first and last word has been projected
correctly by applying a simple heuristic which fills the gaps in a target role span. Let pos
be the index of a word token t in a given sentence, and by extension the set of indices for
a set of words. The target span of role r without any gaps is then defined as:
acc
t (r) = {u | min(pos(at (r)))  pos(u)  max(pos(at (r))}

(14)

We apply this heuristic to all word-based models in this article.
3.4.2 Word Filtering
This technique removes words form a bi-sentence prior to projection according to certain
criteria. We apply two intuitive instantiations of word filtering in our experiments. The
first removes non-content words, i.e., all words which are not adjectives, adverbs, verbs,
or nouns, from the source and target sentences, since alignments for non-content words
321

fiPado & Lapata

S

NP

VP
S

Kim versprach, pnktlich zu kommen

Figure 4: Argument filtering (predicate in boldface, potential arguments in boxes).
are notoriously unreliable and may negatively impact the similarity computations. The
second filter removes all words which remain unaligned in the output of the automatic word
alignment. Both filters aim at distinguishing genuine word alignments from noisy ones and
speed up the computation of semantic alignments.
3.4.3 Argument Filtering
Our last filter applies only to constituent-based models defined over full parse trees. Previous
work in shallow semantic parsing has demonstrated that not all nodes in a tree are equally
probable as semantic roles for a given predicate (Xue & Palmer, 2004). In fact, assuming a
perfect parse, there is a set of likely arguments, to which almost all semantic roles should
be assigned. This set of likely arguments consists of all constituents which are a child
of some ancestor of the predicate, provided that (a) they do not dominate the predicate
themselves and (b) there is no sentence boundary between a constituent and its predicate.
This definition covers long-distance dependencies such as control constructions for verbs, or
support constructions for nouns, and can be extended to accommodate coordination. We
apply this filter to reduce the size of the target tree. In the example in Figure 4, all tree
nodes are removed except the NP Kim and the S punktlich zu kommen.
3.5 Discussion
We have presented a framework for the bilingual projection of semantic roles which is based
on the notion of semantic alignment. We have discussed two broad instantiations of the
framework, namely word-based and constituent-based models. In the latter case, we operationalize the search for an optimal semantic alignment as a graph optimization problem.
Specifically, each bi-sentence is conceptualized as a bipartite graph. Its nodes correspond
to the syntactic constituents of the bi-sentence, and its weighted edges to the cross-lingual
pairwise similarity between constituents. Assumptions about the semantic correspondence
between the languages are formalized as constraints on the graph structure.
We have also discussed three families of constraints. Perfect matching forces correspondences between English and German constituents to be bijective. In contrast, total alignments assume a looser correspondence by leaving constituents on the target side unaligned.
Edge covers occupy a middle ground, assuming that all constituents must be aligned without strictly enforcing one-to-one alignments. While perfect matching is linguistically implausible, by assuming no structural divergence between languages, it can overcome word
alignment errors. Total alignments can model structural changes and are therefore linguis322

fiCross-lingual Annotation Projection for Semantic Roles

LingUnit
words
constituents
constituents
constituents

Similarity
binary
overlap
overlap
overlap

Correspondence
one-to-one
one-to-one
one-to-at-least-one
one-to-many

BiGraph
n/a
perfect matching
edge cover
total

Complexity
linear
cubic
cubic
quadratic

Table 4: Framework instantiations
tically more appropriate, but at the same time more sensitive to alignment errors. Finding
an optimal alignment corresponds to finding the optimal subgraph consistent with our constraints. Efficient algorithms exist for this problem. Finally, we have introduced a small
number of filtering techniques which further reduce the impact of alignment errors.
Our models and their properties are summarized in Table 4. They vary along the following dimensions: the linguistic units employed (LingUnit), the similarity measure (Similarity), their assumptions about semantic correspondence (Correspondence) and the structure
of the bipartite graph this entails (BiGraph). We also mention the complexity of their computation (Complexity). We empirically assess their performance in the following sections.

4. Experiments
We now describe our evaluation of the framework developed in Section 3. We present two
experiments, both of which consider the projection of semantic roles from English sentences
onto their German translations, and evaluate them against German gold standard role annotation. Experiment 1 uses gold standard data for both syntactic and semantic annotation.
This oracle setting assesses the potential of role projection on its own, separating the errors due to translational divergence and our modeling assumptions from those incurred by
preprocessing (e.g., parsing and automatic alignment). Experiment 2 investigates a more
practical setting which employs automatic tools for syntactic and semantic parsing, thus
approximating the conditions of large-scale role projection on parallel corpora.
4.1 Setup
4.1.1 Data
All models were evaluated on the parallel corpus described in Section 2. The corpus was
randomly shuffled and split into a development and a test set (each 50% of the data).
Table 5 reports the number of tokens, sentences, frames, and arguments in the development
and test set for English and German.
Word alignments were computed with the GIZA++ toolkit (Och & Ney, 2003). We
used the entire English-German Europarl bitext as training data to induce alignments for
both directions (source-target, target-source), with the default GIZA++ settings. Following
common practice in Machine Translation, the alignments were symmetrized using the intersection heuristic (Koehn, Och, & Marcu, 2003), which is known to lead to high-precision
alignments. We also produced manual word alignments for all sentences in our corpus,
using the GIZA++ alignments as a starting point and following the Blinker annotation
guidelines (Melamed, 1998).
323

fiPado & Lapata

Language
Dev-EN
Test-EN
Dev-DE
Test-DE

Tokens
11,585
12,019
11,229
11,548

Sentences
491
496
491
496

Frames
491
496
491
496

Roles
2,423
2,465
2,576
2,747

Table 5: Statistics of gold standard parallel corpus broken down into development (Dev)
and test (Test) set.

4.1.2 Method
We implemented the four models shown in Table 4 on their own and with the filtering
techniques introduced in Section 3.4. This resulted in a total of sixteen models, all of which
were evaluated on the development set. Results for the best-performing models were next
validated on the test set. We found the practical runtime of our experiment to be dominated
by input/output XML processing rather than the optimization problem itself.
In both experiments, constituent-based models were compared against the word-based
model, which we treat as a baseline. This latter model is relatively simple: projection relies
exclusively on word alignments, it does not require syntactic analysis, and has linear time
complexity. It thus represents a good point of comparison for models that take linguistic
knowledge into account.
4.1.3 Evaluation Measure
We measure model performance using labeled Precision, Recall, and F1 in the Exact
Match condition, i.e., both the label and the span of the projected English role have to
match the German gold standard role to count as a true positive. We also assess whether differences in performance are statistically significant using stratified shuffling (Noreen, 1989),
an instance of assumption-free approximate randomization testing (see Yeh, 2000, for a discussion).11 Whenever we discuss changes in F1, we refer to absolute (rather than relative)
differences.
4.1.4 Upper Bound
Our annotation study (see Table 2, Section 2.2) obtained an inter-annotator agreement
of 0.84 in the Span Match condition (annotation of the same roles with the same span).
This number can be seen as a reasonable upper bound for the performance of an automatic
semantic role labeling system within a language. It is more difficult to determine a ceiling
for the projection task, since in addition to inter-annotator agreement, we have to take into
account the effect of bilingual divergence. Our annotation study did provide an estimate of
the former, but not of the latter. In default of a method for measuring bilingual agreement
on spans, we adopt the monolingual Span Match agreement as an upper bound for our
projection experiments. Note, however, that this upper bound is not strict  a system with
an oracle should be able to outperform it.
11. The software is available at http://www.nlpado.de/~sebastian/sigf.html.

324

fiCross-lingual Annotation Projection for Semantic Roles

No
Model
WordBL
PerfMatch
EdgeCover
Total
UpperBnd

Filter
Prec
52.0
75.8
71.7
68.9
85.0

Rec
46.2
57.1
61.8
61.3
83.0

F1
48.9
65.1
66.4
64.9
84.0

NA Filter
Model
Prec Rec
WordBL
52.0 46.2
PerfMatch 81.4 69.4
EdgeCover
77.9 69.3
Total
78.8 70.0
UpperBnd
85.0 83.0

F1
48.9
74.9
73.3
74.1
84.0

NC
Model
WordBL
PerfMatch
EdgeCover
Total
UpperBnd

Filter
Prec
37.1
79.4
75.0
69.7
85.0

Rec
32.0
62.2
63.0
60.1
83.0

F1
34.4
69.8
68.5
64.5
84.0

Arg Filter
Model
Prec Rec
WordBL
52.0 46.2
PerfMatch
88.8 56.2
EdgeCover 81.4 69.7
Total
81.2 69.6
UpperBnd
85.0 83.0

F1
48.9
68.8
75.1
75.0
84.0

Table 6: Model comparison on the development set using gold standard parses and semantic
roles and four filtering techniques: no filtering (No Filter), removal of non-aligned
words (NA Filter), removal of non-content words (NC Filter), and removal of nonarguments (Arg Filter). Best performing models are indicated in boldface.

4.2 Experiment 1: Projection on Gold Standard Data
In Experiment 1, we use manually annotated semantic roles and hand-corrected syntactic
analyses for the constituent-based projection models. As explained in Section 4.1, we first
discuss our results on the development set. The best model instantiations are next evaluated
on the test set.
4.2.1 Development Set
Table 6 shows the performance of our models on their own (No Filter) and in combination
with filtering techniques. In the No Filter condition, the word-based model (WordBL) yields
a modest F1 of 48.9% with the application of filling-the-gaps heuristic12 (see Section 3.4 for
details). In the same condition, constituent-based models deliver an F1 increase of approximately 20% (all differences between WordBL and constituent-based models are significant,
p < 0.01). The EdgeCover model performs significantly better than total alignments (Total,
p < 0.05) but comparably to perfect matchings (PerfMatch).
Filtering schemes generally improve the resulting projections for the constituent-based
models. When non-aligned words are removed (NA Filter), F1 increases by 9.8% for PerfMatch, 6.9% for EdgeCover, and 9.2% for Total. PerfMatch and Total are the best performing models with the NA Filter. They significantly outperform EdgeCover (p < 0.05) in
the same condition and all constituent-based models in the No Filter condition (p < 0.01).
The word-based models performance remains constant. By definition WordBL considers
aligned words only; thus, the NA Filter has no impact on its performance.
12. Without filling-the-gaps, F1 drops to 40.8%.

325

fiPado & Lapata

Moderate improvements are observed for constituent-based models when non-content
words are removed (NC filter). PerfMatch performs best in this condition. It is significantly
better than PerfMatch, EdgeCover or Total in the No Filter condition (p < 0.01), but significantly worse than all constituent-based models in the NA filter condition (p < 0.01). The
NC filter yields significantly worse results for WordBL (p < 0.01). This is not surprising,
since the word-based model cannot recover words that have been deleted by a filter, such
as role-initial prepositions or subordinating conjunctions.
Note also that combinations of different filtering techniques can be applied to our
constituent- and word-based models. For example, we can create a constituent-based model
where non-aligned and content words are removed as well as non-arguments. For the sake
of brevity, we do not present results for filter combinations here as they generally do not
improve results further. We find that combining filters tends to remove a large number of
words, and as a result, good alignments are also removed.
Overall, we obtain best performing models when non-argument words are removed
(Arg Filter). Arg Filter is an aggressive filtering technique, since it removes all constituents
but those likely to occupy argument positions. EdgeCover and Total are significantly better
than PerfMatch in the Arg Filter condition (p < 0.01), but perform comparably to PerfMatch when the NA Filter is applied. Moreover, EdgeCover and Total construct almost
identical alignments. This indicates that the two latter models behave similarly when the
alignment space is reduced after removing many possible bad alignments, despite imposing
different constraints on the structure of the bipartite graph. Interestingly, the strict correspondence constraints imposed by PerfMatch result in substantially different alignments.
Recall that PerfMatch attempts to construct a bilingual one-to-one mapping between arguments. When no direct correspondence can be identified for source nodes, it abstains from
projecting. As a result, the alignment produced by PerfMatch shows the highest precision
among all models (88.8%), which is offset by the lowest recall (56.2%). These results tie
in with our earlier analysis of constituent alignments (Section 3.3), where we found that
about one-third of the corpus correspondences are of the one-to-many type. Consider the
following example:
(15)

The Charter means [NP an opportunity to bring the EU closer to the people].
Die Charta bedeutet [NP eine Chance], [S die EU den Burgern naherzubringen].
The Charter means [NP a chance], [S the EU to the citizens to bring closer].

Ideally, the English NP should be aligned to both the German NP and S. EdgeCover, which
can model one-to-many relationships, acts confidently and aligns the NP to the German S
to maximize the overlap similarity, incurring both a precision and recall error. PerfMatch,
on the other hand, cannot handle one-to-many alignments and acts cautiously and makes
only a recall error by aligning the English NP to an empty node. Thus, according to our
evaluation criteria, the analysis of EdgeCover is deemed worse than that of PerfMatch, even
though the former is partly correct.
In sum, filtering improves the resulting projections by making the syntactic analyses
of the source and target sentences more similar to each other. Best results are observed in
NA Filter (PerfMatch) and Arg Filter conditions (Total and EdgeCover). Finally, note that
the best models obtain precision figures that are close to or above the upper bound. The
326

fiCross-lingual Annotation Projection for Semantic Roles

Intersective word
Model
Prec
WordBL
52.9
EdgeCover 86.6
PerfMatch
85.1
UpperBnd
85.0

alignment
Rec
F1
47.4 50.0
75.2 80.5
73.3 78.8
83.0 84.0

Manual word alignment
Model
Prec Rec
F1
WordBL
76.1 73.9 75.0
EdgeCover 86.0 81.8 83.8
PerfMatch
82.8 76.3 79.4
UpperBnd
85.0 83.0 84.0

Table 7: Model performance on the test set with intersective and manual alignments. EdgeCover uses Arg Filter and PerfMatch uses NA Filter. Best performing models are
indicated in boldface.

best recall values are around 70%, significantly below the upper bound of 83%. Aside from
wrongly assigned roles, recall errors are due to short semantic roles (e.g., pronouns), for
which the intersective word alignment often does not contain any alignment links, so that
projection cannot proceed.
4.2.2 Test Set
Our experiments on the test set focus on models which have obtained best results on the
development set using a specific filtering technique. In particular, we report performance
for EdgeCover and PerfMatch in the Arg Filter and NA Filter conditions, respectively. In
addition, we assess the effect of the automatic word alignment on these models by using
both intersective and manual word alignments.
Our results are summarized in Table 7. When intersective alignments are used (lefthand side), EdgeCover performs numerically better than PerfMatch, but the difference is
not statistically significant. This corresponds to our findings on the development set.13 The
right-hand side shows the results when manually annotated word alignments are used. As
can be seen, the performance of WordBL increases sharply from 50.0% to 75.0% (F1). This
underlines the reliance of the word-based model on clean word alignments. Despite this
performance improvement, WordBL still lags behind the best constituent-based model by
approximately 9% F1. This means that there are errors made by the word-based model that
can be corrected by constituent-based models, mostly cases where translation introduced
material in the target sentence that cannot be word-aligned to any expressions in the source
sentence or recovered by the filling-the-gaps heuristic. An example is shown below, where
the translation of clarification as more detailed explanation leads to the introduction of two
German words, die naheren. These words are unaligned at the word level and thus do not
form part of the role when word-based projection is used.
(16)

[Commissioner Barniers clarification]Role
[die naheren
Erlauterungen von Kommissar
Barnier]Role
[the more detailed explanations of Commissioner Barnier]Role

13. Our results on the test set are slightly higher in comparison to the development set. The fluctuation
reflects natural randomness in the partitioning of our corpus.

327

fiPado & Lapata

Evaluation condition
All predicates
Verbs only

Prec
81.3
81.3

Rec
58.6
63.8

F1
68.1
71.5

Table 8: Evaluation of Giuglea and Moschittis (2004) shallow semantic parser on the English side of our parallel corpus (test set)

Constituent-based models generally profit less from cleaner word alignments. Their performance increases by 1%3% F1. The improvement is due to higher recall (approximately
5% in the case of EdgeCover) but not precision. In other words, the main effect of the manually corrected word alignment is to make possible the projection of previously unavailable
roles. EdgeCover performs close to the human upper bound when gold standard alignments
are used. Under noise-free conditions it is able to account for one-to-many constituent alignments, and thus models our corpus better.
Aside from alignment noise, most of the errors we observe in the output of our models
are due to translational divergences, or problematic monolingual role assignments, such as
pronominal adverbs in German. Many German verbs such as glauben (believe) exhibit a
diathesis alternation: they subcategorize either for a prepositional phrase (X glaubt an Y,
X believes in Y), or for an embedded clause which must be preceded by the pronominal
adverb daran (X glaubt daran, dass Y, X believes that Y). Even though the pronominal
adverb forms part of the complement clause (and therefore also of the role assigned to it),
it has no English counterpart. In contrast to example (16) above, the incomplete span dass
Y forms a complete constituent. Unless it is removed by Arg Filter prior to alignment, this
error cannot be corrected by the use of constituents.
4.3 Experiment 2: Projection with Automatic Roles
In this experiment, we evaluate our projection models in a more realistic setting, using
automatic tools for syntactic and semantic parsing.
4.3.1 Preprocessing
For this experiment, we use the uncorrected syntactic analyses of the bilingual corpus as
provided by Collins (1997) and Dubeys (2005) parsers (cf. Section 2.1). We automatically
assigned semantic roles using a state-of-the-art semantic parser developed by Giuglea and
Moschitti (2004). We trained their parser on the FrameNet corpus (release 1.2) using their
standard features and not the extended set which is based on PropBank and would
have required a PropBank analysis of the entire FrameNet corpus.
We applied the shallow semantic parser to the English side of our parallel corpus to
obtain semantic roles, treating the frames as given.14 The task involves locating the frame
elements in a sentence and finding the correct label for a particular frame element. Table 8
shows an evaluation of the parsers output on our test set against the English gold standard
annotation. Giuglea and Moschitti report an accuracy of 85.2% on the role classification
14. This decomposition of frame-semantic parsing has been general practice in recent role labeling tasks,
e.g. at Senseval-3 (Mihalcea & Edmonds, 2004).

328

fiCross-lingual Annotation Projection for Semantic Roles

Model
WordBL
PerfMatch
EdgeCover
UpperBnd

Filter
NA Filter
Arg Filter

Prec
52.5
73.0
70.0
81.3

Rec
34.5
45.4
45.1
58.6

F1
41.6
56.0
54.9
68.1

Table 9: Performance of best constituent-based model on the test set (automatic syntactic
and semantic analysis, intersective word alignment)

task, using the standard feature set.15 Our results are not strictly comparable to theirs,
since we identify the role-bearing constituents in addition to assigning them a label. Our
performance can thus be expected to be worse, since we inherit errors from the frame element
identification stage. Secondly, our test set differs from the training data in vocabulary
(affecting the lexical features) and suffers from parsing errors. Since Giuglea and Moschittis
(2004) implementation can handle only verbs, we also assessed performance on the subset of
verbal predicates (87.5% of test tokens). The difference between the complete and verbs-only
data sets amounts to 3.4% F1, which represents the unassigned roles for nouns.
4.3.2 Setup
We report results for the word-based baseline model, and the best projection models from
Experiment 1, namely PerfMatch (NA filter) and EdgeCover (Arg Filter). We use the the
complete test set (including nouns and adjectives) in order to make our evaluation comparable to Experiment 1.
4.3.3 Results
The results are summarized in Table 9. Both PerfMatch (NA Filter) and EdgeCover
(Arg Filter) perform comparably at 5556% F1. This is approximately 25 points F1 worse
than the results obtained on manual annotation (compare Table 9 to Table 7). WordBLs
performance (now 41.6% F1) degrades less (around 8% F1), since it is only affected by
semantic role assignment errors. However, consistently with Experiment 1, the constituentbased models sill outperform WordBL by more than 10% F1 (p < 0.01). These results
underscore the ability of bracketing information, albeit noisy, to correct and extend word
alignment. Although the Arg Filter performed well in Experiment 1, we observe less of an
effect here. Recall that the filter uses not only bracketing, but also dominance information,
and is therefore particularly vulnerable to misparses. Like in Experiment 1, we find that
our models yield overall high precision but low recall. Precision drops by 15% F1 when
automatic annotations are used, whereas recall drops by 30%; however, note that this drop
includes about 5% nominal roles that fall outside the scope of the shallow semantic parser.
Further analysis showed that parsing errors form a large source of problems in Experiment 2. German verb phrases are particularly problematic. Here, the relatively free
word order combines with morphological ambiguity to produce ambiguous structures, since
15. See the work of Giuglea and Moschitti (2006) for an updated version of their shallow semantic parser.

329

fiPado & Lapata

Band
Error 0
Error 1
Error 2+

Prec
85.1
75.9
40.7

Rec
74.1
34.6
18.5

F1
79.2
47.6
25.4

Table 10: PerfMatchs performance in relation to error rate in the automatic semantic role
labeling (Error 0: no labeling errors, Error 1: one labeling error, Error 2+: two
or more labeling errors).

third person plural verb forms (FIN) are identical to infinitival forms (INF). Consider the
following English sentence, (17a), and two syntactic analyses of its German translation,
(17b)/(17c):
(17)

a.
b.
c.

when we recognize [that we have to work on this issue]
wenn wir erkennenFIN , [dass wir [daran arbeitenINF ] mussenFIN ]
when we recognize [that we have to [work on it]]
wenn wir [erkennenINF , [dass wir daran arbeitenFIN ]] mussenFIN
when we have to [recognize that [we work on it]]

(17b) gives the correct syntactic analysis, but the parser we used produced the highly
implausible (17c). As a result, the English sentential complement that we have to work on
this issue cannot be aligned to a single German constituent, nor to a combination of them.
In this situation, PerfMatch will generally not align the constituent at all and thus sacrifice
recall. EdgeCover (and Total) will produce a (wrong) alignment and sacrifice precision.
Finally, we evaluated the impact of semantic role labeling errors on projection. We split
the semantic parsers output into three bands: (a) sentences with no role labeling errors
(Error 0, 35% of the test set), (b) sentences with one labeling error (Error 1, 33% of the
test set), and (c) sentences with two or more labeling errors (Error 2+, 31% of the test set).
Table 10 shows the performance of the best model, PerfMatch (NA filter), for each of these
bands. As can be seen, when the output of the automatic labeler is error-free, projection
attains an F1 of 79.2%, comparable to the results obtained in Experiment 1.16 Even though
projection clearly degrades with the quality of the semantic role input, PerfMatch still
delivers projections with high precision for the Error 1 band. As discussed above, the low
recall values for bands Error 1 and 2+ result from the labelers low recall.

5. Related Work
Previous work on annotation projection has primarily focused on annotations spanning
short linguistic units. These range from POS tags (Yarowsky & Ngai, 2001), to NP chunks
(Yarowsky & Ngai, 2001), dependencies (Hwa et al., 2002), and word senses (Bentivogli &
Pianta, 2005). A different strategy for the cross-lingual induction of frame-semantic information is presented by Fung and Chen (2004), who do not require a parallel corpus. Instead,
16. It is reasonable to assume that in these sentences, at least the relevant part of the syntactic analysis is
correct.

330

fiCross-lingual Annotation Projection for Semantic Roles

they use a bilingual dictionary to construct a mapping between FrameNet entries and concepts in HowNet, an on-line ontology for Chinese.17 In a second step, they use HowNet
knowledge to identify monolingual Chinese sentences with predicates that instantiate these
concepts, and label their arguments with FrameNet roles. Fung and Chen report high accuracy values, but their method relies on the existence of resources which are presumably
unavailable for most languages (in particular, a rich ontology). Recently, Basili et al. (2009)
propose an approach to semantic role projection that is not word-based and does not employ syntactic information. Using a phrase-based SMT system, they heuristically assemble
target role spans out of phrase translations, defining phrase similarity in terms of translation probability. Their method occupies a middle ground between word-based projection
and constituent-based projection.
The work described in this article relies on a parallel corpus for harnessing information
about semantic correspondences. Projection works by creating semantic alignments between
constituents. The latter correspond to nodes in a bipartite graph, and the search for the best
alignment is cast as an optimization problem. The view of computing optimal alignments
by graph matching is relatively widespread in the machine translation literature (Melamed,
2000; Matusov, Zens, & Ney, 2004; Tiedemann, 2003; Taskar, Lacoste-Julien, & Klein, 2005).
Despite individual differences, most approaches formalize word alignment as a minimumweight matching problem, where each pair of words in a bi-sentence is associated with a
score representing the desirability of that pair. The alignment for the bi-sentence is the
highest scoring matching under some constraints, for example that matchings must be oneto-one. Our work applies graph matching to the level of constituents and compares a larger
class of constraints (see Section 3.3) than previous approaches. For example, Taskar et al.
(2005) examine solely perfect matchings and Matusov et al. (2004) only edge covers.
A number of studies have addressed the constituent alignment problem in the context of
extracting of translation patterns (Kaji, Kida, & Morimoto, 1992; Imamura, 2001). However,
most approaches only search for pairs of constituents which are perfectly word aligned, an
infeasible strategy when alignments are obtained automatically. Other work focuses on the
constituent alignment problem, but uses greedy search techniques that are not guaranteed to
find an optimal solution (Matsumoto, Ishimoto, & Utsuro, 1993; Yamamoto & Matsumoto,
2000). Meyers, Yangarber, and Grishman (1996) propose an algorithm for aligning parse
trees which is only applicable to isomorphic structures. Unfortunately, this restriction limits
their application to structurally similar languages and high-quality parse trees.
Although we evaluate our models only on the semantic role projection task, we believe
they also show promise in the context of SMT, especially for systems that use syntactic
information to enhance translation quality. For example, Xia and McCord (2004) exploit
constituent alignment for rearranging sentences in the source language so as to make their
word order similar to that of the target language. They learn tree reordering rules by aligning
constituents heuristically, using an optimization procedure analogous to the total alignment
model presented in this article. A similar approach is described in a paper by Collins, Koehn,
and Kucerova (2005); however, the rules are manually specified and the constituent alignment step reduces to inspection of the source-target sentence pairs. The different alignment
17. For information on HowNet, see http://www.keenage.com/zhiwang/e_zhiwang.html.

331

fiPado & Lapata

models presented in this article could be easily employed for the reordering task common
to both approaches.

6. Conclusions
In this article, we have argued that parallel corpora show promise in relieving the lexical acquisition bottleneck for new languages. We have proposed annotation projection as a means
of obtaining FrameNet annotations automatically, using resources available for English and
exploiting parallel corpora. We have presented a general framework for projecting semantic
roles that capitalizes on the use of constituent information during projection, and modelled
the computation of a constituent alignment as the search for an optimal subgraph in a
bipartite graph. This formalization allows us to solve the search problem efficiently using
well-known graph optimization methods. Our experiments have focused on three modeling
aspects: the level of noise in the linguistic annotation, constraints on alignments, and noise
reduction techniques.
We have found that constituent information yields substantial improvements over word
alignments. Word-based models offer a starting point for low-density languages for which
parsers are not available. However, word alignments are too noisy and fragmentary to deliver
accurate projections for annotations with long spans such as semantic roles. Our experiments have compared and contrasted three constituent-based models which differ in their
assumptions regarding cross-lingual correspondence (total alignments, edge covers, and perfect matchings). Perfect matchings, a restrictive alignment model that enforces one-to-one
alignments, performed most reliably across all experimental conditions. In particular, its
precision surpassed all other models. This indicates that a strong semantic correspondence
can be assumed as a modelling strategy, at least for English and German and the parsing
tools available for these languages. As a side effect, the performance of constituent-based
models increases only slightly when manual word alignments are used, which means that
near-optimal results can be obtained using automatic alignments.
As far as alignment noise reduction techniques are concerned, we find that removing
non-aligned words (NA Filter) and non-arguments (Arg Filter) yields the best results. Both
filters are independent of the language pair and make only weak assumptions about the
underlying linguistic representations in question. The choice of the best filter depends on
the goals of projection. Removing non-aligned words is relatively conservative and tends
to balance precision and recall. In contrast, the more aggressive filtering of non-arguments
yields projections with high precision and low recall. Arguably, for training shallow semantic
parsers on the target language (Johansson & Nugues, 2006), it is more desirable to have
access to high-quality projections. However, there is a number of options for increasing
precision subsequent to projection that we have not explored in this article. One fully automatic possibility is generalization over multiple occurrences of the same predicate to detect
and remove suspicious projection instances, e.g. following the work by Dickinson and Lee
(2008). Another direction is postprocessing by annotators, e.g., by adopting the annotate
automatically, correct manually methodology used to provide high volume annotation in
the Penn Treebank project. Our models could also be used in a semi-supervised setting,
e.g., to provide training data for unknown predicates.
332

fiCross-lingual Annotation Projection for Semantic Roles

The extensions and improvements of the framework presented here are many and varied.
Firstly, we believe that the models developed in this article are useful for other semantic
role paradigms besides FrameNet, or indeed for other types of semantic annotation. Potential applications include the projection of PropBank roles18 , discourse structure, and
named entities. As mentioned earlier, our models are also relevant for machine translation
and could be used for the reordering of constituents. Our results indicate that syntactic
knowledge on the target side plays an important role in projecting annotations with longer
spans. Unfortunately, for many languages there are no broad-coverage parsers available.
However, it may not be necessary to obtain complete parses for the semantic role projection
task. Two types of syntactic information are especially valuable here: bracketing information (which guides projection towards linguistically plausible role spans) and knowledge
about the arguments of sentence predicates. Bracketing information can be acquired in an
unsupervised fashion (Geertzen, 2003). Argument structure information could be obtained
from dependency parsers (e.g., McDonald, 2006) or partial parsers that are able to identify
predicate-argument relations (e.g., Hacioglu, 2004). Another interesting direction concerns
the combination of longer phrases, like those provided by phrase-based SMT systems, with
constituent information obtained from the output of a parser or chunker.
The experiments presented in this article made use of a simple semantic similarity
measure based on word alignment. A more sophisticated approach could have combined
the alignment scores with information provided in a bilingual dictionary. Inspired by crosslingual information retrieval, Widdows, Dorow, and Chan (2002) propose a bilingual vector
model. The underlying assumption is that words that have similar co-occurrences in a
parallel corpus are also semantically similar. Source and target words are represented as
n-dimensional vectors whose components correspond to the most frequent content words in
the source language. In this framework, the similarity of any source-target word pair can be
computed using a geometric measure such as cosine or Euclidean distance. The more recent
polylingual topic models (Mimno, Wallach, Naradowsky, Smith, & McCallum, 2009) offer
a probabilistic interpretation of a similar idea.
In this article, we have limited ourselves to parallel sentences where the frame is preserved. This allows us to transfer roles directly from the source onto the target language
without having to acquire knowledge about possible translational divergences first. A generalization of the framework presented here could adopt a strategy where some form of
mapping is applied during projection, akin to the transfer rules used in machine translation.
Thus far, we have only explored models applying the identity mapping. Knowledge about
other possible mappings can be acquired from manually annotated parallel corpora (Pado
& Erk, 2005). An interesting avenue for future work is to identify semantic role mappings
in a fully automatic fashion.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the three anonymous referees whose feedback helped to improve the
present article. Special thanks are due to Chris Callison-Burch for the linearb word alignment user interface, to Ana-Maria Giuglea and Alessandro Moschitti for providing us with
18. Note, however, that the cross-lingual projection of PropBank roles raises the question of their interpretation; see the discussion by Fung et al. (2007).

333

fiPado & Lapata

their shallow semantic parser, and to our annotators Beata Kouchnir and Paloma Kreischer. We acknowledge the financial support of DFG (Pado; grant Pi-154/9-2) and EPSRC
(Lapata; grant GR/T04540/01).

References
Basili, R., Cao, D., Croce, D., Coppola, B., & Moschitti, A. (2009). Cross-language frame
semantics transfer in bilingual corpora. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, pp. 332345,
Mexico City, Mexico.
Bentivogli, L., & Pianta, E. (2005). Exploiting parallel texts in the creation of multilingual semantically annotated resources: the MultiSemCor corpus. Natural Language
Engineering, 11 (3), 247261.
Boas, H. C. (2005). Semantic frames as interlingual representations for multilingual lexical
databases. International Journal of Lexicography, 18 (4), 445478.
Brown, P. F., Pietra, S. A. D., Pietra, V. J. D., & Mercer, R. L. (1993). Mathematics
of statistical machine translation: Parameter estimation. Computational Linguistics,
19 (2), 263311.
Budanitsky, A., & Hirst, G. (2006). Evaluating WordNet-based measures of lexical semantic
relatedness. Computational Linguistics, 32 (1), 1347.
Burchardt, A., Erk, K., Frank, A., Kowalski, A., Pado, S., & Pinkal, M. (2006). Consistency and coverage: Challenges for exhaustive semantic annotation. 28. Jahrestagung,
Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Sprachwissenschaft. Bielefeld, Germany.
Burchardt, A., Erk, K., Frank, A., Kowalski, A., Pado, S., & Pinkal, M. (2009). Framenet
for the semantic analysis of German: Annotation, representation and automation. In
Boas, H. (Ed.), Multilingual FrameNet. Mouton de Gruyter. To appear.
Burchardt, A., & Frank, A. (2006). Approaching textual entailment with LFG and
FrameNet frames. In Proceedings of the RTE-2 Workshop, Venice, Italy.
Burnard, L. (2000). The Users Reference Guide for the British National Corpus (World
Edition). British National Corpus Consortium, Oxford University Computing Service.
Carreras, X., & Marquez, L. (2005). Introduction to the CoNLL-2005 shared task: Semantic
role labeling. In Proceedings of the 9th Conference on Computational Natural Language
Learning, pp. 152164, Ann Arbor, MI.
Carreras, X., Marquez, L., & Chrupala, G. (2004). Hierarchical recognition of propositional
arguments with perceptrons. In Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, pp. 106109, Boston, MA.
Collins, M. (1997). Three generative, lexicalised models for statistical parsing. In Proceedings
of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 16
23, Madrid, Spain.
Collins, M., Koehn, P., & Kucerova, I. (2005). Clause restructuring for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 531540, Ann Arbor, MI.
334

fiCross-lingual Annotation Projection for Semantic Roles

Cormen, T., Leiserson, C., & Rivest, R. (1990). Introduction to Algorithms. MIT Press.
Diab, M., & Resnik, P. (2002). An unsupervised method for word sense tagging using
parallel corpora. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association of
Computational Linguistics, pp. 255262, Philadelphia, PA.
Dickinson, M., & Lee, C. M. (2008). Detecting errors in semantic annotation. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
Marrakech, Morocco.
Dorr, B. (1995). Machine translation divergences: A formal description and proposed solution. Computational Linguistics, 20 (4), 597633.
Dowty, D. (1991). Thematic proto-roles and argument selection. Language, 67, 547619.
Dubey, A. (2005). What to do when lexicalization fails: parsing German with suffix analysis
and smoothing. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 314321, Ann Arbor, MI.
Eiter, T., & Mannila, H. (1997). Distance measures for point sets and their computation..
Acta Informatica, 34 (2), 109133.
Erk, K., Kowalski, A., Pado, S., & Pinkal, M. (2003). Towards a resource for lexical semantics: A large German corpus with extensive semantic annotation. In Proceedings of the
41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 537544,
Sapporo, Japan.
Fillmore, C. J. (1968). The case for case. In Bach, & Harms (Eds.), Universals in Linguistic
Theory, pp. 188. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New York.
Fillmore, C. J. (1982). Frame semantics. In Linguistics in the Morning Calm, pp. 111137.
Hanshin, Seoul, Korea.
Fillmore, C. J., Johnson, C. R., & Petruck, M. R. (2003). Background to FrameNet. International Journal of Lexicography, 16, 235250.
Fleischman, M., & Hovy, E. (2003). Maximum entropy models for FrameNet classification. In Proceedings of the 8th Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pp. 4956, Sapporo, Japan.
Frank, A., Krieger, H.-U., Xu, F., Uszkoreit, H., Crysmann, B., Jorg, B., & Schafer, U.
(2007). Question answering from structured knowledge sources. Journal of Applied
Logic, 5 (1), 2048.
Fredman, M. L., & Tarjan, R. E. (1987). Fibonacci heaps and their uses in improved network
optimization algorithms. Journal of the ACM, 34 (3), 596615.
Fung, P., & Chen, B. (2004). BiFrameNet: Bilingual frame semantics resources construction
by cross-lingual induction. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pp. 931935, Geneva, Switzerland.
Fung, P., Wu, Z., Yang, Y., & Wu, D. (2006). Automatic learning of Chinese-English
semantic structure mapping. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACL Workshop on Spoken
Language Technology, Aruba.
335

fiPado & Lapata

Fung, P., Wu, Z., Yang, Y., & Wu, D. (2007). Learning bilingual semantic frames: Shallow
semantic parsing vs. semantic role projection. In Proceedings of the 11th Conference
on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation, pp. 7584, Skovde,
Sweden.
Geertzen, J. (2003). String alignment in grammatical inference: what suffix trees can do.
Masters thesis, ILK, Tilburg University, Tilburg, the Netherlands.
Gildea, D., & Jurafsky, D. (2002). Automatic labeling of semantic roles. Computational
Linguistics, 28 (3), 245288.
Gimenez, J., & Marquez, L. (2007). Linguistic features for automatic evaluation of heterogenous MT systems. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, pp. 256264, Prague, Czech Republic.
Giuglea, A.-M., & Moschitti, A. (2004). Knowledge discovery using FrameNet, VerbNet and
PropBank. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Ontology and Knowledge Discovering
at the 15th European Conference on Machine Learning, Pisa, Italy.
Giuglea, A.-M., & Moschitti, A. (2006). Semantic role labeling via FrameNet, VerbNet
and PropBank. In Proceedings of the 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 929936, Sydney, Australia.
Grenager, T., & Manning, C. (2006). Unsupervised discovery of a statistical verb lexicon.
In Proceedings of the 11th Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pp. 18, Sydney, Australia.
Hacioglu, K. (2004). A lightweight semantic chunker based on tagging. In Proceedings of
the joint Human Language Technology Conference and Annual Meeting of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 145148,
Boston, MA.
Hi, C., & Hwa, R. (2005). A backoff model for bootstrapping resources for non-english
languages. In Proceedings of the joint Human Language Technology Conference and
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 851858, Vancouver, BC.
Hwa, R., Resnik, P., Weinberg, A., & Kolak, O. (2002). Evaluation translational correspondance using annotation projection. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 392399, Philadelphia, PA.
Hwa, R., Resnik, P., Weinberg, A., Cabezas, C., & Kolak, O. (2005). Bootstrapping parsers
via syntactic projection across parallel texts. Journal of Natural Language Engineering, 11 (3), 311325.
Imamura, K. (2001). Hierarchical phrase alignment harmonized with parsing.. In Proceedings of the 6th Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim Symposium, pp. 377384,
Tokyo, Japan.
Jackendoff, R. S. (1990). Semantic Structures. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Johansson, R., & Nugues, P. (2006). A FrameNet-Based Semantic Role Labeler for Swedish.
In Proceedings of the 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 436443, Sydney, Australia.
336

fiCross-lingual Annotation Projection for Semantic Roles

Jonker, R., & Volgenant, A. (1987). A shortest augmenting path algorithm for dense and
sparse linear assignment problems. Computing, 38, 325340.
Kaji, H., Kida, Y., & Morimoto, Y. (1992). Learning translation templates from bilingual
text. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp. 672678, Nantes, France.
Koehn, P., Och, F. J., & Marcu, D. (2003). Statistical phrase-based translation. In Proceedings of the joint Human Language Technology Conference and Annual Meeting of
the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
4854, Edmonton, AL.
Koehn, P. (2005). Europarl: A parallel corpus for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the MT Summit X, Phuket, Thailand.
Marquez, L., Carreras, X., Litkowski, K. C., & Stevenson, S. (2008). Semantic role labeling:
An introduction to the special issue. Computational Linguistics, 34 (2), 145159.
Matsumoto, Y., Ishimoto, H., & Utsuro, T. (1993). Structural matching of parallel texts.
In Proceedings of ACL 31st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pp. 2330, Columbus, OH.
Matusov, E., Zens, R., & Ney, H. (2004). Symmetric word alignments for statistical maching
translation. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pp. 219225, Geneva, Switzerland.
McDonald, R. (2006). Discriminative Training and Spanning Tree Algorithms for Dependency Parsing. Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania.
Melamed, I. D. (1998). Manual annotation of translational equivalence: The Blinker project.
Tech. rep. IRCS TR #98-07, IRCS, University of Pennsylvania.
Melamed, I. D. (2000). Models of translational equivalence among words. Computational
Linguistics, 2 (23), 221249.
Meyers, A., Yangarber, R., & Grishman, R. (1996). Alignment of shared forests for bilingual corpora. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, pp. 460465, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Mihalcea, R., & Edmonds, P. (Eds.). (2004). Proceedings of Senseval-3: The 3rd International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems for the Semantic Analysis of Text,
Barcelona, Spain.
Miltsakaki, E., Prasad, R., Joshi, A., & Webber, B. (2004). Annotating discourse connectives
and their arguments. In Proceedings of the NAACL/HLT Workshop on Frontiers in
Corpus Annotation, Boston, MA.
Mimno, D., Wallach, H. M., Naradowsky, J., Smith, D. A., & McCallum, A. (2009). Polylingual topic models. In Proceedings of the 14th Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pp. 880889, Singapore.
Moschitti, A. (2008). Kernel methods, syntax and semantics for relational text categorization. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management, pp. 253262, Napa Valley, CA.
337

fiPado & Lapata

Moschitti, A., Quarteroni, S., Basili, R., & Manandhar, S. (2007). Exploiting syntactic
and shallow semantic kernels for question answer classification. In Proceedings of the
45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics, pp. 776783,
Prague, Czech Republic.
Narayanan, S., & Harabagiu, S. (2004). Question answering based on semantic structures.
In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp.
693701, Geneva, Switzerland.
Noreen, E. (1989). Computer-intensive Methods for Testing Hypotheses: An Introduction.
John Wiley and Sons Inc.
Och, F. J., & Ney, H. (2003). A systematic comparison of various statistical alignment
models. Computational Linguistics, 29 (1), 1952.
Ohara, K. H., Fujii, S., Saito, H., Ishizaki, S., Ohori, T., & Suzuki, R. (2003). The Japanese
FrameNet project: A preliminary report. In Proceedings of the 6th Meeting of the
Pacific Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 249254, Halifax, Nova Scotia.
Pado, S., & Erk, K. (2005). To cause or not to cause: Cross-lingual semantic matching for
paraphrase modelling. In Proceedings of the EUROLAN Workshop on Cross-Linguistic
Knowledge Induction, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Pado, S., & Lapata, M. (2005). Cross-lingual bootstrapping for semantic lexicons. In
Proceedings of the 22nd National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 10871092,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Palmer, M., Gildea, D., & Kingsbury, P. (2005). The Proposition Bank: An annotated
corpus of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics, 31 (1), 71106.
Postolache, O., Cristea, D., & Orasan, C. (2006). Tranferring coreference chains through
word alignment. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, Genoa, Italy.
Riloff, E., Schafer, C., & Yarowsky, D. (2002). Inducing information extraction systems for
new languages via cross-language projection. In Proceedings of the 19th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp. 828834, Taipei, Taiwan.
Shen, D., & Lapata, M. (2007). Using semantic roles to improve question answering. In
Proceedings of the 12th Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 1221, Prague, Czech Republic.
Spreyer, K., & Frank, A. (2008). Projection-based acquisition of a temporal labeller. In
Proceedings of the 3rd International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing,
pp. 489496, Hyderabad, India.
Subirats, C., & Petruck, M. (2003). Surprise: Spanish FrameNet. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Frame Semantics, XVII. International Congress of Linguists, Prague,
Czech Republic.
Surdeanu, M., Harabagiu, S., Williams, J., & Aarseth, P. (2003). Using predicate-argument
structures for information extraction. In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 815, Sapporo, Japan.
338

fiCross-lingual Annotation Projection for Semantic Roles

Swier, R. S., & Stevenson, S. (2004). Unsupervised semantic role labelling. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 95102.
Bacelona, Spain.
Swier, R. S., & Stevenson, S. (2005). Exploiting a verb lexicon in automatic semantic
role labelling. In Proceedings of the Joint Human Language Technology Conference
and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 883890,
Vancouver, British Columbia.
Taskar, B., Lacoste-Julien, S., & Klein, D. (2005). A discriminative matching approach to
word alignment. In Proceedings of the joint Human Language Technology Conference
and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7380,
Vancouver, BC.
Tatu, M., & Moldovan, D. (2005). A semantic approach to recognizing textual entailment.
In Proceedings of the joint Human Language Technology Conference and Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 371378, Vancouver, BC.
Taule, M., Mart, M., & Recasens, M. (2008). Ancora: Multilevel annotated corpora for
Catalan and Spanish. In Proceedings of 6th International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, Marrakesh, Morocco.
Tiedemann, J. (2003). Combining clues for word alignment. In Proceedings of the 16th
Meeting of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pp. 339346, Budapest, Hungary.
Tokarczyk, A., & Frank, A. (2009). Cross-lingual projection of LFG f-structures: Resource
induction for Polish. In Proceedings of Lexical Functional Grammar 2009, Cambridge,
UK.
van Leuven-Zwart, K. M. (1989). Translation and original: Similarities and dissimilarities.
Target, 1 (2), 151181.
Vogel, S., Ney, H., & Tillmann, C. (1996). HMM-based word alignment in statistical translation. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp. 836841, Copenhagen.
Weeds, J. (2003). Measures and Applications of Lexical Distributional Similarity. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Sussex.
Widdows, D., Dorow, B., & Chan, C.-K. (2002). Using parallel corpora to enrich multilingual
lexical resources. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, pp. 240245, Las Palmas, Canary Islands.
Wu, D., & Fung, P. (2009a). Can semantic role labeling improve SMT?. In Proceedings
of the 13th Annual Conference of the European Association for Machine Translation,
pp. 218225, Barcelona, Spain.
Wu, D., & Fung, P. (2009b). Semantic roles for SMT: A hybrid two-pass model. In Proceedings of the joint Human Language Technology Conference and Annual Meeting of
the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
1316, Boulder, CO.
339

fiPado & Lapata

Xia, F., & McCord, M. (2004). Improving a statistical MT system with automatically
learned rewrite patterns. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pp. 508514, Geneva, Switzerland.
Xue, N., & Palmer, M. (2004). Calibrating features for semantic role labeling. In Proceedings
of the 9th Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 88
94, Barcelona, Spain.
Xue, N., & Palmer, M. (2009). Adding semantic roles to the Chinese treebank. Natural
Language Engineering, 15 (1), 143172.
Yamamoto, K., & Matsumoto, Y. (2000). Acquisition of phrase-level bilingual correspondence using dependency structure. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics, pp. 933939, Saarbrucken, Germany.
Yarowsky, D., & Ngai, G. (2001). Inducing multilingual POS taggers and NP bracketers via
robust projection across aligned corpora. In Proceedings of the 2nd Annual Meeting
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
200207, Pittsburgh, PA.
Yarowsky, D., Ngai, G., & Wicentowski, R. (2001). Inducing multilingual text analysis
tools via robust projection across aligned corpora. In Proceedings of the 1st Human
Language Technology Conference, pp. 161168, San Francisco, CA.
Yeh, A. (2000). More accurate tests for the statistical significance of result differences. In
Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pp.
947953, Saarbrucken, Germany.

340

fi