Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 34 (2009) 339-389

Submitted 06/08; published 03/09

Identification of Pleonastic It Using the Web
Yifan Li
Petr Musilek
Marek Reformat
Loren Wyard-Scott

yifan@ece.ualberta.ca
musilek@ece.ualberta.ca
reform@ece.ualberta.ca
wyard@ece.ualberta.ca

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB T6G 2V4 Canada

Abstract
In a significant minority of cases, certain pronouns, especially the pronoun it, can
be used without referring to any specific entity. This phenomenon of pleonastic pronoun
usage poses serious problems for systems aiming at even a shallow understanding of natural
language texts. In this paper, a novel approach is proposed to identify such uses of it: the
extrapositional cases are identified using a series of queries against the web, and the cleft
cases are identified using a simple set of syntactic rules. The system is evaluated with four
sets of news articles containing 679 extrapositional cases as well as 78 cleft constructs. The
identification results are comparable to those obtained by human efforts.

1. Introduction
Anaphora resolution, which associates a word or phrase (the anaphor) with a previously
mentioned entity (the antecedent), is an active field of Natural Language Processing (NLP)
research. It has an important role in many applications where a non-trivial level of understanding of natural language texts is desired, most notably in information extraction and
machine translation. To illustrate, an information extraction system trying to keep track
of corporate activities may find itself dealing with news such as Microsoft today announced
that it is adopting XML as the default file format for the next major version of its Microsoft
Office software . . .  It would be impossible to provide any insight into what Microsofts
intention is without associating the pronominal anaphors it and its with their antecedent,
Microsoft.
Adding to the already complex problem of finding the correct antecedent, pronouns are
not always used in the same fashion as shown in the earlier example. It is well-known
that some pronouns, especially it, can occur without referring to a nominal antecedent, or
any antecedent at all. Pronouns used without an antecedent, often referred to as being
pleonastic or structural, pose a serious problem for anaphora resolution systems. Many
anaphora resolution systems underestimate the issue and choose not to implement a specific
module to handle pleonastic pronouns but instead have their input sanitized manually to
exclude such cases. However, the high frequency of pronoun usage in general and pleonastic
cases in particular warrants that the phenomenon deserves more serious treatment. The
pronoun it, which accounts for most of the pleonastic pronoun usages, is by far the most
frequently used of all pronouns in the British National Corpus (BNC). In the Wall Street
Journal Corpus (WSJ; Marcus, Marcinkiewicz, & Santorini, 1993), upon which this study
2009 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

is based, it accounts for more than 30% of personal pronoun usage. The percentage of
cases where it lacks a nominal antecedent is also significant: previous studies have reported
figures between 16% and 50% (Gundel, Hedberg, & Zacharski, 2005) while our own analysis
based upon the WSJ corpus results in a value around 25%, more than half of which are
pleonastic cases.
Applying criteria similar to those established by Gundel et al. (2005), the usage of it
can be generally categorized as follows. The instances of it being analyzed are shown in
italics; and the corresponding antecedents, extraposed clauses, and clefted constituents are
marked by underlining.
1. Referential with nominal antecedent
[0006:002]1 The thrift holding company said it expects to obtain regulatory approval
and complete the transaction by year-end.
where it refers to the thrift holding company.
2. Referential with clause antecedent
[0041:029] He was on the board of an insurance company with financial problems, but
he insists he made no secret of it.
where it refers to the fact that the person was on the board of an insurance company.
[0102:002-003] Everyone agrees that most of the nations old bridges need to be
repaired or replaced. But theres disagreement over how to do it.
where it, together with do, refers to the action of repairing or replacing the bridge.
3. No antecedent  Pleonastic
(a) Extraposition
[0034:020] But it doesnt take much to get burned.
where the infinitive clause to get burned is extraposed and its original position
filled with an expletive it. The equivalent non-extraposed sentence is But to get
burned doesnt take much.
[0037:034] Its a shame their meeting never took place.
The equivalent non-extraposed sentence is That their meeting never took place
is a shame.
(b) Cleft2
[0044:026] And most disturbing, it is educators, not students, who are blamed
for much of the wrongdoing.
The equivalent non-cleft version is And most disturbing, educators, not students,
are blamed for much of the wrongdoing.
1

All example sentences are selected from the WSJ corpus, with locations encoded in the format [article:sentence].
2
Some claim that cleft pronouns should not be classified as expletive (Gundel, 1977; Hedberg, 2000).
Nevertheless, this does not change the fact that the pronouns do not have nominal antecedents; hence clefts
are included in this analysis.

340

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

[0591:021] It is partly for this reason that the exchange last week began trading
in its own stock basket product . . .
The equivalent non-cleft version is The exchange last week began trading in its
own stock basket product partly for this reason.
(c) Local Situation
[0207:037] It was not an unpleasant evening . . .
This category consists of it instances related to weather, time, distance, and other
information about the local situation. Since the texts reviewed in this study lack
instances of other subtypes, only weather and time cases are discussed.
4. Idiomatic
[0010:010] The governor couldnt make it, so the lieutenant governor welcomed the
special guests.
This paper focuses on pleonastic cases (the third category), where each subclass carries
its unique syntactic and/or semantic signatures. The idiomatic category, while consisting of
non-anaphoric cases as well, is less coherent and its identification is much more subjective
in nature, making it a less attractive target.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a brief survey of related work
toward both classification of it and identification of pleonastic it; Section 3 proposes a
web-based approach for identification of pleonastic it; Section 4 demonstrates the proposed
method with a case study; Section 5 follows with evaluation; and finally, Section 6 discusses
the findings and presents ideas for future work.

2. Previous Work
As Evans (2001) pointed out, usage of it is covered in most serious surveys of English
grammar, some of which (e.g. Sinclair, 1995) also provide classifications based on semantic
categories. In a recent study, Gundel et al. (2005) classify third-person personal pronouns
into the following comprehensive hierarchy:
 Noun phrase (NP) antecedent
 Inferrable
 Non-NP antecedent
 Fact
 Situation

 Proposition
 Reason

 Activity

 Event

 Full cleft
 Atmospheric

 Truncated cleft
 Other pleonastic

 Pleonastic
 Full extraposition
 Truncated extraposition
 Idiom
 Exophoric
 Indeterminate
341

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

Without going into the details of each category, it is apparent from the length of the
list that the phenomenon of pleonastic it, and more generally pronouns without explicit
nominal antecedents, have been painstakingly studied by linguists. However, despite being
identified as one of the open issues of anaphora resolution (Mitkov, 2001), work on automatic
identification of pleonastic it is relatively scarce. To date, existing studies in the area fall
into one of two categories: one wherein a rule-based approach is used, and the other using
a machine-learning approach.

2.1 Rule-based Approaches
Paice and Husk (1987) together with Lappin and Leass (1994) provide examples of rulebased systems that make use of predefined syntactic patterns and word lists. The Paice
and Husk approach employs bracketing patterns such as it . . . to and it . . . who to meet
the syntactic restrictions of extraposition and cleft. The matched portions of sentences are
then evaluated by further rules represented by word lists. For example, the it . . . to rule
prescribes that one of the task status words, such as good or bad, must be present amid
the construct. In order to reduce false positives, general restrictions are applied on sentence
features such as construct length and intervening punctuation.
Lappin and Leasss (1994) approach employs a set of more detailed rules such as It is
Modaladj that S and It is Cogv-ed that S, where Modaladj and Cogv are predefined
lists of modal adjectives (e.g. good and useful ) and cognitive verbs (e.g. think and believe),
respectively. Compared to Paice and Husks (1987) approach, this method is much more
restrictive, especially in its rigidly-specified grammatical constraints. For example, it is
not clear from the original Lappin and Leass paper whether the system would be able to
recognize sentences such as [0146:014] It isnt clear, however, whether . . .  despite its claim
that the system takes syntactic variants into consideration.
Lappin and Leasss (1994) approach is part of a larger system, and no evaluation is
provided. The Paice and Husk (1987) approach, on the other hand, evaluates impressively.
It has an accuracy of 93.9% in determining pleonastic constructs on the same data used for
rule development, without using part-of-speech tagging or parsing.
Both rule-based systems rely on patterns to represent syntactic constraints and word
lists to represent semantic constraints. This makes them relatively easy to implement and
maintain. However, these features also make them less scalable  when challenged with
large and unfamiliar corpora, their accuracies deteriorate. For example, Paice and Husk
(1987) noticed nearly a 10% decrease in accuracy when rules developed using one subset
of the corpus are applied to another subset without modifications. Boyd, Gegg-Harrison,
and Byron (2005) also observed a significant performance penalty when the approach was
applied to a different corpus. In other words, rule-based systems can only be as good as they
are designed to be. Denber (1998) suggested using WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) to extend
the word lists, but it is doubtful how helpful this would be considering the enormous number
of possible words that are not included in existing lists and the number of inapplicable words
that will be identified by such an approach.
342

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

2.2 Machine-learning Approaches
Recent years have seen a shift toward machine-learning approaches, which shed new light on
the issue. Studies by Evans (2001, 2000) and Boyd et al. (2005) are examples of this class.
Both systems employ memory-based learning on grammatical feature vectors; Boyd et al.s
approach also includes a decision tree algorithm that produces less ideal results. In his
attempt to place uses of it into seven categories, including pleonastic and nominal anaphoric
among others, Evans uses 35 features to encode information such as position/proximity,
lemmas, and part-of-speech, related to both the pronoun and other components of interest,
such as words and noun phrases, in the sentence. Evans reported 73.38% precision and
69.25% recall for binary classification of pleonastic cases, and an overall binary classification
accuracy of 71.48%. In a later study featuring MARS3 , a fully automatic pronoun resolution
system that employs the same approach, Mitkov, Evans, and Orasan (2002) reported a
significantly higher binary classification accuracy of 85.54% when the approach is applied
to technical manuals.
Boyd et al.s (2005) approach targets pleonastic it alone. It uses 25 features, most
of which concern lengths of specific syntactic structures; also included are part-of-speech
information and lemmas of verbs. The study reports an overall precision of 82% and recall
of 71%, and, more specifically, recalls on extrapositional and cleft constructs of 81% and
45%, respectively.
In addition, Clemente, Torisawa, and Satou (2004) used support vector machines with a
feature-set similar to that proposed by Evans (2001) to analyze biological and medical texts,
and reported an overall accuracy of 92.7%  higher than that of their own memory-based
learning implementation. Ng and Cardie (2002) built a decision tree for binary anaphoricity
classification on all types of noun phrases (including pronouns) using the C4.5 induction
algorithm. Ng and Cardie reported overall accuracies of 86.1% and 84.0% on the MUC-6
and MUC-7 data sets. Categorical results, however, are not reported and it is not possible
to determine the systems performance on pronouns. Using automatically induced rules,
Muller (2006) reported an overall accuracy of 79.6% when detecting non-referential it in
spoken dialogs. An inter-annotator agreement study conducted in the same paper indicates
that it is difficult even for humans to classify instances of it in spoken dialogs. This finding
is supported by our own experiences.
Machine-learning approaches are able to partly circumvent the restrictions imposed by
fixed word lists or rigid grammatical patterns through learning. However, their advantage
also comes with a price  training is required in the initial development phase and for
different corpora re-training is preferable since lemmas are part of the feature sets. Since
the existing approaches fall within the area of supervised learning (i.e. training data need
to be manually classified), the limited number of lemmas they gather from training may
lead to degraded performance in unfamiliar circumstances. Moreover, the features used
during learning are unable to reliably capture the subtleties of the original sentences, especially when considering non-technical documents. For example, the quantitative features
frequently used in machine-learning approaches, such as position and distance, become less
reliable when sentences contain a large number of adjuncts. Additionally, the meanings of
lemmas are often domain-dependent and can vary with their local structural and lexical
3

Available online at http://clg.wlv.ac.uk/demos/MARS/

343

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

environment  such nuances cannot be captured by the lemma features alone. In short,
while machine-learning approaches generally deliver better performance classifying it than
their rule-based counterparts do, they have their own inherent problems.

3. A Web Based Approach
Both syntactic patterns and semantics of various clause constituents play important roles in
determining if a third-person personal pronoun is pleonastic. The role of grammar is quite
obvious since both extrapositions and clefts must follow the grammatical patterns by which
they are defined. For example, the most commonly seen type of it-extraposition follows the
pattern:
it + copula + status + subordinate clause
[0089:017] It
is
easy
to see why the ancient art is on the ropes.
In contrast, the role semantics plays here is a little obscure until one sits down and starts
to dream up exceptions (Paice & Husk, 1987) analogous to [0074:005]  . . . it has taken
measures to continue shipments during the work stoppage. vis-a-vis [0367:044]  . . . it didnt
take a rocket scientist to change a road bike into a mountain bike . . . , where referential
and pleonastic cases share the same syntactic structure. Despite its less overt role, failure
to process semantic information can result in a severe degradation of performance. This
observation is supported by the word-list-based systems dramatic decay in accuracy when
they are confronted with text other than that they obtained their word lists from.
Like every other classification system, the proposed system strives to cover as many cases
as possible and at the same time perform classification as accurately as possible. To achieve
this, it attempts to make good use of both syntactic and semantic information embedded
in sentences. A set of relaxed yet highly relevant syntactic patterns is first applied to the
input text to filter out the syntactically inviable cases. Unlike the matching routines of some
previous approaches, this process avoids detailed specification of syntactic patterns. Instead,
it tries to include every piece of text containing a construct of possible interest. Different
levels of semantic examinations are performed for each subtype of pleonastic constructs.
For reasons discussed later in Section 3.2.2, semantic analysis is not performed on clefts.
A WordNet-based analysis is used to identify weather/time cases because among the
samples examined during the systems development stage, cases pertaining to this class are
relatively uniform in their manner of expression. For the most complex and populous class,
the extrapositions, candidates are subjected to a series of tests performed as queries against
the web. Results of the queries provide direct evidence of how a specific configuration of
clause constituents is generally used.
The reason that such a corpus-based approach is chosen versus applying manually constructed knowledge sources, such as a word list or WordNet, is fourfold:
1. Manually constructed knowledge sources, regardless of how comprehensive they are,
contain only a small portion of general world knowledge. In the particular settings
of this study, general world knowledge is used for making judgements such as which
words are allowed to serve as the matrix verb of an extraposition, and even more
subtle, which specific sense of a word is permitted.
344

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

2. Manually compiled knowledge sources are subject to specific manners of organization
that may not satisfy the systems needs. Taking WordNet as an example, it identifies
a large number of various relationships among entities, but the information is mainly
organized along the axes of synonyms, hypernyms (kind-of relationship), and holonyms
(part-of relationship) etc., while it is the surroundings of a particular word that are
of more interest to this study.
3. Natural languages are evolving quickly. Taking English as an example, each year new
words are incorporated into the language4 and the rules of grammar have not been
immune to changes either. Using a large and frequently-updated corpus such as the
web allows the system to automatically adapt to changes in language.
4. Most importantly, corpora collect empirical evidence of language usage. When the
sample size is large enough, as in the case of the web, statistics on how a specific
construct is generally used in corpora can be employed as an indicator of its speakers
intention.
The proposed approach is also inspired by Hearsts (1992) work on mining semantic
relationships using text patterns, and many other quests that followed in the same direction (Berland & Charniak, 1999; Poesio, Ishikawa, im Walde, & Vieira, 2002; Markert,
Nissim, & Modjeska, 2003; Cimiano, Schmidt-Thieme, Pivk, & Staab, 2005). Unlike these
investigations that focus on the semantic relationship among noun phrases, the pleonastic
pronoun identification problem mandates more complex queries to be built according to
the original sentences. However, the binary nature of the problem also makes it simpler to
apply comparative analysis on results of multiple queries, which, in turn, leads to better
immunity to noise.
Figure 1 illustrates the general work flow of the proposed system. A sentence is first
preprocessed to obtain a dependency tree with part-of-speech tags, which is then passed
on to the syntactic filtering component to determine whether minimum grammatical requirements of the pleonastic constructs are met. It is also during the syntactic filtering
process that clefts and weather/time expressions are identified using syntactic cues and the
WordNet respectively. The candidate extrapositions are thereafter used to instantiate
various queries on search engines; the results returned from the queries serve as parameters
for the final decision-making mechanism.
3.1 Preprocessing
The preprocessing component transforms the syntactic information embedded in natural
language texts into machine-understandable structures. During the preprocessing stage,
each word is assigned a part-of-speech tag, and the whole sentence is parsed using a dependency grammar (DG) parser. For simplicitys sake, the current system is designed to use the
WSJ corpus, which is already tagged and parsed with context-free grammar (CFG). A head
percolation table similar to that proposed by Collins (1999) is used to obtain the head component of each phrase. The rest of the phrase constituents are then rearranged under the
4
Metcalf and Barnhart (1999) have compiled a chronicle of many important additions to the vocabulary
of American English.

345

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

Figure 1: Illustration of the system work flow broken into three processing stages  preprocessing, syntactic filtering, and web-based analysis.

head component to form the dependency tree using a procedure detailed by Xia and Palmer
(2001). Figure 2 illustrates the syntactic structure of a sentence in the WSJ corpus. Both
the original CFG parse tree and the derived dependency structure are shown side-by-side.
Head entities are underlined in the CFG diagram and circled in the DG diagram.

Figure 2: Illustration of a sentences syntactic structure, both as annotated in the WSJ
corpus (left) and after head percolation (right).

346

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

As shown in Figure 2, the function tags (e.g. SBJ, TMP, and CLR) and tracing information
present in the context-free parse tree are not ported to the dependency tree. This is because
real-world parsers usually do not produce such tags. Except this deliberate omission, both
parse trees contain essentially the same information, only presented in different manners.
In this study, dependency structure is preferred over the more popular phrase structure
mainly because of its explicit marking of both the head components and the complementing/modifying relationships among various components. This feature is very helpful for
instantiating the search-engine queries.
3.2 Syntactic Filtering
The syntactic filtering process determines whether a clause meets the grammatical requirements of an extraposition or cleft construct by matching the clause against their respective
syntactic patterns.
3.2.1 Extrapositions
It-extrapositions occur when a clause is dislocated out of its ordinary position and replaced
with it. An it-extraposition usually follows the pattern:
matrix clause
z

 }|



 noun phrase




adjective phrase
be
+



prepositional phrase
itsubject +







verb phrase

|

{z

matrix verb phrase

 {

 







+ extraposed clause






}

(1)

This pattern summarizes the general characteristics of subject it-extrapositions, where the
pronoun it assumes the subject position. When the matrix verb (the verb following it) is
the main copula to be, which serves to equate or associate the subject and an ensuing logical
predicate, it must be followed by either a noun phrase, an adjective phrase, or a prepositional
phrase.5 There is no special requirement for the matrix verb phrase otherwise. Similarly,
there is almost no restriction placed upon the extraposed clause except that a full clause
should either be introduced without a complementizer (e.g. [0037:034] Its a shame their
meeting never took place.) or led by that, whether, if, or one of the wh-adverbs (e.g.
how, why, when, etc.). These constraints are developed by generalizing a small portion of
the WSJ corpus and are largely in accordance with the patterns identified by Kaltenbock
(2005). Compared to the patterns proposed by Paice and Husk (1987), which also cover
cases such as it . . . to , it . . . that and it . . . whether , they allow for a broader range
of candidates by considering sentences that are not explicitly marked (such as [0037:034]).
The above configuration covers sentences such as:
5
Other copula verbs do not receive the same treatment. This arrangement is made to accommodate
cases where verbs such as to seem and to appear are immediately followed by an extraposed clause.

347

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

[0529:009] Since the cost of transporting gas is so important to producers ability to sell it, it helps to have input and access to transportation
companies.
[0037:034] Its a shame their meeting never took place.
[0360:036] It is insulting and demeaning to say that scientists needed new crises
to generate new grants and contracts . . .6
[0336:019] It wont be clear for months whether the price increase will stick.
Except in the case of the last sentence, the above constructs are generally overlooked by
the previous rule-based approaches identified in Section 2.1. As the last sample sentence
illustrates, the plus sign (+) in the pattern serves to indicate a forthcoming component
rather than suggest two immediately adjacent components.
Some common grammatical variants of the pattern are also recognized by the system,
including questions (both direct and indirect), inverted sentences, and parenthetical expressions (Paice & Husk, 1987). This further expands the patterns coverage to sentences such
as:
[0772:006] I remembered how hard it was for an outsider to become accepted . . .
[0562:015] The sooner our vans hit the road each morning, the easier it is for
us to fulfill that obligation.
[0239:009] Americans it seems have followed Malcolm Forbess hot-air lead and
taken to ballooning in a heady way.
Aside from being the subject of the matrix clause, extrapositional it can also appear in
the object position. The system described here captures three flavors of object extraposition.
The first type consists of instances of it followed by an object complement:
[0044:014] Mrs. Yeargin was fired and prosecuted under an unusual South
Carolina law that makes it a crime to breach test security.
In this case the system inserts a virtual copula to be between the object it and the object
complement (a crime), making the construct applicable to the pattern of subject extraposition. For example, the underlined part of the prior example translates into it is a crime
to breach test security.
The other two kinds of object extraposition are relatively rare:
 Object of verb (without object complement)
[0114:007] Speculation had it that the company was asking $100 million for an operation said to be losing about $20 million a year . . .
 Object of preposition
[1286:054] They should see to it that their kids dont play truant . . .
These cases cannot be analyzed within the framework of subject extraposition and thus
must be approached with a different pattern:
verb + [preposition] it object + full clause

(2)

6
Neither insulting nor demeaning is in Paice and Husks (1987) list of task status words and therefore
cannot activate the it . . . to pattern.

348

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

The current system requires that the full clauses start with a complementizer that. This
restriction, however, is included only to simplify implementation. Although in object expositions it is more common to have clauses led by that, full clauses without a leading
complementizer are also acceptable.
According to Kaltenbocks (2005) analysis there are special cases in which noun phrases
appear as an extraposed component, such as Its amazing the number of theologians that
sided with Hitler. He noted that these noun phrases are semantically close to subordinate
interrogative clauses and can therefore be considered a marginal case of extraposition. However, no such cases were found in the corpus during the annotation process and they are
consequently excluded from this study.
3.2.2 Cleft
It-clefts are governed by a slightly more restricted grammatical pattern. Following Hedberg
(1990), it-clefts can be expressed as follows:
it subject + copula + clefted constituent + cleft clause

(3)

The cleft clause must be finite (i.e. a full clause or a relative clause); and the clefted constituents are restricted to either noun phrases, clauses, or prepositional phrases.7 Examples
of sentences meeting these constraints include:
[0296:029] Its the total relationship that is important.
[0267:030] It was also in law school that Mr. OKicki and his first wife had the
first of seven daughters.
[0121:048] If the market goes down, I figure its paper profits Im losing.
In addition, another non-canonical and probably even marginal case is also identified as a
cleft:
[0296:037] I really do not understand how it is that Filipinos feel so passionately
involved in this father figure that they want to dispose of and yet they
need.
Text following the structure of this sample, where a wh-adverb immediately precedes it, is
captured using the same syntactic pattern by appending a virtual prepositional phrase to
the matrix copula (e.g. for this reason), as if the missing information has already been
given.
Each of the examples above represents a possible syntactic construct of it-clefts. While
it is difficult to tell the second and the third cases apart from their respective extrapositional
counterparts, it is even more difficult to differentiate the first case from an ordinary copula
sentence with a restrictive relative clause (RRC). For example, the following sentence,
[0062:012] Its precisely the kind of product thats created the municipal landfill
monster, the editors wrote.
and its slightly modified version,
[0062:012] Its this kind of product thats created the municipal landfill monster, the editors wrote.
7
Adjective and adverb phrases are also possible but they are relatively less frequent and are excluded
from this analysis.

349

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

are similar in construction. However, the latter is considered a cleft construct while the
first is an RRC construct. To make things worse, and as pointed out by many (e.g. Boyd
et al., 2005, p.3, example 5), sometimes it is impossible to make such a distinction without
resorting to the context of the sentence.
Fortunately, in the majority of cases the syntactic features, especially those of the clefted
constituent, provide some useful cues. In an it-cleft construct, the cleft clause does not constitute a head-modifier relationship with the clefted constituent, but instead forms an existential and exhaustive presupposition8 (Davidse, 2000; Hedberg, 2000; Lambrecht, 2001).
For example, I figure its paper profits Im losing. implies that in the context there is something (and only one thing) that the speaker is going to lose, and further associates paper
profits with it. This significant difference in semantics often leaves visible traces on the syntactic layer, some of which, such as the applicability of proper nouns as clefted constituents,
are obvious. Others are less obvious. The system utilizes the following grammatical cues
when deciding if a construct is an it-cleft9 :
 For the clefted constituent:
 Proper nouns10 or pronouns, which cannot be further modified by an RRC;
 Common nouns without determiner, which generally refer to kinds11 ;
 Plurals, which violate number agreement;
 Noun phrases that are grounded with demonstratives or possessives, or that are
modified by RRCs, which unambiguously identify instances, making it unnecessary in most cases to employ an RRC;
 Noun phrases grounded with the definite determiner the, and modified by an
of -preposition whose object is also a noun phrase grounded with the or is in
plural. These constructs are usually sufficient for introducing uniquely identifiable entities (through association), thus precluding the need for additional RRC
modifiers. The words kind, sort, and their likes are considered exceptions of this
rule;
 Adverbial constructs that usually do not appear as complements. For example,
phrases denoting location (here, there etc.) or a specific time (today, yesterday
etc.), or a clause led by when; and
 Full clauses, gerunds, and infinitives.
 For the subordinate clause:
 Some constructs appear awkward to be used as an RRC. For example, one would
generally avoid using sentences such as it is a place that is dirty, as there are
8

This applies to canonical clefts, which do not include the class represented by [0267:030].
A construct is considered an it-cleft if any of the conditions are met.
10
There are exceptional cases where proper names are used with additional determiners and RRC modifiers, such as in the John who was on TV last night, c.f. Sloats (1969) account.
11
The validity of this assertion is under debate (Krifka, 2003). Nevertheless, considering the particular
syntactic setting in discussion, it is highly unlikely that bare noun phrases are used to denote specific
instances.
9

350

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

better alternatives. In the current implementation two patterns are considered
inappropriate for RRCs, especially in the syntactic settings described in Equation 3: A) the subordinate verb phrase consists of only a copula verb and an
adjective; and B) the subordinate verb phrase consists of no element other than
the verb itself.
 Combined:
 When the clefted constituent is a prepositional phrase and the subordinate clause
is a full clause, such as in the case of [0267:030], the construct is classified as a
cleft12 .
Some of these rules are based on heuristics and may have exceptions, making them less
ideal guidelines. Moreover, as mentioned earlier, there are cleft cases that cannot be told
apart from RRCs by any grammatical means. However, experiments show that these rules
are relatively accurate and provide appropriate coverage, at least for the WSJ corpus.
3.2.3 Additional Filters
Aside from the patterns described in earlier sections, a few additional filters are installed
to eliminate some semantically unfit constructs and therefore reducing the number of trips
to search engines. The filtering rules are as follows:
 For a clause to be identified as a subordinate clause and subsequently processed for
extraposition or cleft, the number of commas, dashes and colons between the clause
and it should be either zero or more than one, a rule adopted from Paice and Husks
(1987) proposal.
 Except the copula to be, sentences with matrix verbs appearing in their perfect tense
are not considered for either extraposition or cleft.
 When it is the subject of multiple verb phrases, the sentence is not considered for
either extraposition or cleft.
 Sentences having a noun phrase matrix logical predicate together with a subordinate
relative clause are not considered for extraposition.
 Sentences having both a matrix verb preceded by modal auxiliaries could or would
and a subordinate clause led by if or a wh-adverb are not considered for extraposition.
For example, [0013:017]  . . . it could complete the purchase by next summer if its bid
is the one approved by . . .  is not considered for extraposition.
Except for the first, these rules are optional and can be deactivated in case they introduce
false-negatives.
3.3 Using the Web as a Corpus
The first question regarding using the web as a corpus is whether it can be regarded as a
corpus at all. As Kilgarriff and Grefenstette (2003) pointed out, following the definition of
12
In case it is not a cleft, chances are that it is an extraposition. This assumption, therefore, does not
affect the overall binary classification.

351

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

corpus-hood that a corpus is a collection of texts when considered as an object of language
or literary study, the answer is yes. With the fundamental problem resolved, what remains
is to find out whether the web can be an effective tool for NLP tasks.
As a corpus, the web is far from being well-balanced or error-free. However, it has
one feature in which no other corpus can be even remotely comparable  its size. No one
knows exactly how big it is, but each of the major search engines already indexes billions
of pages. Indeed, the web is so large that sometimes a misspelled word can yield tens of
thousands of results (try the word neglectible). This sends out a mixed signal about using
the web as a corpus: on the good side, even relatively infrequent terms yield sizable results;
on the bad side, the web introduces much more noise than manually-compiled corpora do.
In Markert and Nissims (2005) recent study evaluating different knowledge sources for
anaphora resolution, the web-based method achieves far higher recall ratio than those that
are BNC- and WordNet-based, while at the same time yielding slightly lower precision.
Similar things can be said about the webs diverse and unbalanced composition, which
means that it can be used as a universal knowledge source  only if one can manage not to
get overwhelmed by non-domain-specific information.
That being said, it is still very hard to overstate the benefits that the web offers. As the
largest collection of electronic texts in natural language, it not only hosts a good portion
of general world knowledge, but also stores this information using the very syntax that
defines our language. In addition, it is devoid of the systematic noise introduced into
manually-constructed knowledge sources during the compilation process (e.g. failure to
include less frequent items or inflexible ways of information organization). Overall, the web
is a statistically reliable instrument for analyzing various semantic relationships stored in
natural languages by means of examples.
As also suggested by Kilgarriff (2007) and many others, it is technically more difficult
to exploit the web than to use a local corpus and it can often be dangerous to rely solely
on statistics provided by commercial search engines. This is mainly due to the fact that
commercial search engines are not designed for corpus research. Worse, some of their design
goals even impede such uses. For example, search engines skew the order of results using a
number of different factors in order to provide users with the best results. Combined with
this is the fact that they only return results up to certain thresholds, making it essentially
impossible to get unbiased results. Other annoyances include unreliable result counts, lack
of advanced search features13 , and unwillingness to provide unrestricted access to their
APIs. Before a new search engine specifically designed for corpus research is available, it
seems we will have to work around some of those restrictions and live with the rest.
3.4 Design of Search Engine Queries
As discussed in previous sections, it-extrapositions cannot be reliably identified using syntactic signatures alone or in combination with synthetic knowledge bases. To overcome the
artificial limitations imposed by knowledge sources, the proposed system resorts to the web
for the necessary semantic information.
13
For example, the wildcard () feature on Google, which could be immensely useful for query construction, no longer restricts its results to single words since 2003; Yahoos ability to support alternate words
within quoted texts is limited, while MSN does not offer that feature at all.

352

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

The system employs three sets of query patterns: the what-cleft, the comparative expletive test, and the missing-object construction. Each set provides a unique perspective of
the sentence in question. The what-cleft pattern is designed to find out if the sentence under investigation has a valid what-cleft counterpart. Since it-extrapositions and what-clefts
are syntactically compatible (as shown in Section 3.4.1) and valid readings can usually be
obtained by transformations from one construct to the other, the validity of the what-cleft
is indicative of whether or not the original sentence is extrapositional. The comparative
expletive test patterns are more straightforward  they directly check whether the instance
of it can be replaced by other entities that cannot be used expletively in the same context as
that of an extrapositional it. If the alternate construct is invalid, the original sentence can
be determined as expletive. The third set of patterns are supplemental. They are intended
only for identifying the relatively rare phenomenon of missing-object construction, which
may not be reliably handled by the previous pattern sets.
Designing the appropriate query patterns is the most important step in efforts to exploit
large corpora as knowledge sources. For complex queries against the web, it is especially
important to suppress unwanted uses of certain components, which could result from different word senses, different sentence configuration, or a speakers imperfect command of the
language. For example, the query it is a shame that could return both a valid extrapositional construct and an RRC such as It is a shame that is perpetuated in his life; and the
query what is right is that could return both valid what-clefts and sentences such as Why
we ought to do what is right is that . . .  This study employs three different approaches to
curb unwanted results:
 The first and most important measure is comparative analysis  pairs of similarlyconstructed queries are sent out to the search engine and the ratios of result counts
are used for the decision. This method is effective for problems caused by both different
sentence configuration and bad language usage, since generally neither contribute a
fraction of results large enough to significantly affect the ratio. The method also
provides a normalized view of the web because what is of interest to this study is not
exactly how frequently a specific construct is used, but whether it is more likely to
carry a specific semantic meaning when it is used.
 The second measure is to use stubs in query patterns, as detailed in the following
sections. Stubs help ensure that the outcomes of queries are syntactically and semantically similar to the original sentences and partly resolve the problems caused by
word sense difference.
 Finally, when it is infeasible to use comparative analysis, part of the query results are
validated to obtain an estimated number of valid results.
3.4.1 Query Pattern I: The What-cleft
The first query pattern,
What + verb phrase + copula + stub

(4)

is a what-(pseudo-)cleft construct that encompasses matrix-level information found in an
it-extraposition. The pattern is obtained using a three-step transformation as illustrated
353

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

below:

1)

2)

3)

it + verb phrase + clause
It
is easy
to see why the ancient art is on the ropes. [0089:017]

clause
+
verb phrase
To see why the ancient art is on the ropes is easy.

What + verb phrase + copula + clause
What is easy
is
to see why the ancient art is on the ropes.

What + verb phrase + copula + stub
is
to
What is easy

(5)

Step 1 transforms the original sentence (or clause) to the corresponding non-extraposition
form by removing the pronoun it and restoring the information to the canonical subjectverb-complement order. In the above example, the clause to see . . . is considered the real
subject and is moved back to its canonical position. The non-extraposition form is subsequently converted during step 2 to a what-cleft that highlights its verb phrase. Finally, in
step 3, the subordinate clause is reduced into a stub to enhance the patterns coverage. The
choice of stub depends on the structure of the original subordinate clause: to is used when
the original subordinate clause is an infinitive, a gerund, or a for . . . infinitive construct14 .
For the rest of the cases, the original complementizer, or that, in the case where there is
no complementizer, is used as stub. The use of a stub in the pattern imposes a syntactic
constraint, in addition to the ones prescribed by the pronoun what and the copula is, that
demands a subordinate clause be present in query results. The choice of stubs also reflects,
to a certain degree, the semantics of the original texts and therefore can be seen as a weak
semantic constraint.
Below are a few other examples of the what-cleft transformation:
[0059:014] It remains unclear whether the bond issue will be rolled over. 
What remains unclear is whether
[0037:034] Its a shame their meeting never took place. 
What is a shame is that
The what-cleft pattern only identifies whether the matrix verb phrase is capable of
functioning as a constituent in an it-extraposition. Information in the subordinate clauses is
discarded because this construct is used relatively infrequently and adding extra restrictions
to the query will prohibit it from yielding results in many cases.
Some it-extraposition constructs such as it appears that . . .  and it is said that . . . 
do not have a valid non-extraposition counterpart, but the what-cleft versions often bear
certain degrees of validity and queries instantiated from the pattern will often yield results
(albeit not many) from reputable sources. It is also worth noting that although the input
and output constructs of the transformation are syntactically compatible, they are not
necessarily equivalent in terms of givenness (whether and how information in one sentence
14
According to Hamawand (2003), the for . . . infinitive construct carries distinct semantics; reducing it to
the infinitive alone changes its function. However, with only a few exceptional cases, we find this reduction
generally acceptable. i.e. The lost semantics does not affect the judgment of expletiveness.

354

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

has been entailed by previous discourse). Kaltenbock (2005) noted that the percentage
of extrapositional it constructs carrying new information varies greatly depending on the
category of the text. In contrast, a what-cleft generally expresses new information in the
subordinate clause. The presupposed contents in the two constructs are different, too.
What-clefts, according to Gundel (1977), from which the it-clefts are derived, have the
same existential and exhaustive presuppositions carried by their it-cleft counterparts. On
the other hand, the it-extrapositions, which are semantically identical to their corresponding
non-extrapositions, lack such presuppositions or, at most, imply them at a weaker strength
(Geurts & van der Sandt, 2004). These discrepancies hint that a derived what-cleft is a
stronger expression than the original extraposition, which may have been why queries
instantiated from the pattern tend to yield considerably less results.
Another potential problem with this pattern is its omission of the subordinate verb,
which occasionally leads to false positives. For example, it does not differentiate between
it helps to have input and access to transportation companies and it helps expand our
horizon. This deficiency is accommodated by additional query patterns.
3.4.2 Query Pattern II: Comparative Expletiveness Test
The second group of patterns provides a simplified account of the original text in a few
different flavors. After execution, the results from individual queries are compared to assess
the expletiveness of the subject pronoun. This set of patterns takes the following general
form:
pronoun + verb phrase + simplified extraposed clause
(6)
The only difference among individual patterns lies in the choice of the matrix clause subject
pronoun: it, which, who, this, and he. When the patterns are instantiated and submitted to
a search engine, the number of hits obtained from the it version should by far outnumber
that of the other versions combined if the original text is an it-extraposition; otherwise the
number of hits should be at least comparable. This behavior reflects the expletive nature of
the pronoun in an it-extraposition, which renders the sentence invalid when it is replaced
with other pronouns that have no pleonastic use.
A simplified extraposed clause can take a few different forms depending on its original
structure:
Original Structure
infinitive (to meet you)
for . . . infinitive15 (for him to see the document)
gerund (meeting you)
full clause led by complementizer
(it is a shame that their meeting never took place)
full clause without complementizer
(it is a shame their meeting never took place)

Simplified
infinitive + stub
infinitive + stub
gerund + stub
complementizer + stub
that + stub

Table 1: Simplification of extraposed clause
15
The for . . . passive-infinitive is transformed into active voice (e.g. for products to be sold to sell
products).

355

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

Similar to the case of Pattern I, the stub is used both as a syntactic constraint and a
semantic cue. Depending on the type of search engine, the stub can be either the, which
is the most widely used determiner, or a combination of various determiners, personal
pronouns and possessive pronouns, all of which indicate a subsequent noun phrase. In the
case that an infinitive construct involves a subordinate clause led by a wh-adverb or that,
the complementizer is used as stub. This arrangement guarantees that the results returned
from the query conform to the original text syntactically and semantically. A null value
should be used for stubs in an object position if the original text lacks a nominal object.
To illustrate the rules of transformation, consider the following sentence:
[0044:010] My teacher said it was OK for me to use the notes on the test, he
said.
The relevant part of the sentence is:
it + verb phrase + clause
it
was OK
for me to use the notes on the test
Applying the clause simplification rules, the first query is obtained:
it + verb phrase + simplified clause
it
was OK
to use the
The second query is generated by simply replacing the pronoun it with an alternative
pronoun:
alternative pronoun + verb phrase + simplified clause
he
was OK
to use the
Google reports 94,200 hits for the it query, while only one page is found using the alternative
query. Since the pronoun it can be used in a much broader context, replacing it with he
alone hardly makes a balanced comparison. Instead, the combination of which, who, this,
and he is used, as illustrated in the following examples:
[0044:010] My teacher said it was OK for me to use the notes on the test, he
said.

)
(
it
was ok to use the
which/who/this/he
[0089:017] It
( is easy to see why the
) ancient art is on the ropes. 
it
is easy to see why
which/who/this/he
A special set of patterns is used for object extrapositions16 to accommodate their unique
syntactic construct:
verb + [preposition] pronoun + that + stub

(7)

Stubs are chosen according to the same rules for the main pattern set, however only one
alternative pronoun  them  is used.
16
Instances containing object complements are treated under the framework of subject extraposition and
are not included here.

356

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

[0114:007] Speculation had it that the company was asking $100 million for an
operation
said)to be losing about $20 million a year . . . 
(
it
had
that the
them
3.4.3 Query Pattern III: Missing-object Construction
One search engine annoyance is that they ignore punctuation marks. This means one
can only search for text that matches a specific pattern string, but not sentences that
end with a pattern string. The stubs used in Pattern II are generally helpful for excluding sentences that are semantically incompatible with the original from the search
results. However, under circumstances where no stub is attached to the queries (where the
query results should ideally consist of only sentences that end with the query string), the
search engine may produce more results than needed. Sentences conforming to the pattern
it + copula + missing-object construction, such as (referring to a book) it is easy to
read, present one such situation. What is unique about the construction  and why special
treatment is needed  is that a missing-object construction usually has an it-extraposition
counterpart in which the object is present, for example it is easy to read the book . Since
the missing-object constructions are virtually the same (only shorter) as their extrapositional counterparts, there is a good chance for them to be identified as extrapositions. The
following are some additional examples of the missing-object construction:
[0290:025] Where non-violent civil disobedience is the centerpiece, rather than
a lawful demonstration that may only attract crime, it is difficult to
justify.
[0018:024-025] No price for the new shares has been set. Instead, the companies
will leave it up to the marketplace to decide.
[0111:005] He declined to elaborate, other than to say, It just seemed the right
thing to do at this minute.
Two sets of patterns are proposed17 to identify the likes of the foregoing examples. The
first pattern, the compound adjective test, is inspired by Nannis (1980) study considering
the easy-type adjective followed by an infinitive (also commonly termed tough construction)
as a single complex adjective. The pattern takes the form
stub + adjectivebase -to -verb

(8)

where the stub, serving to limit the outcome of the query to noun phrases, takes a combination of determiners or a/an alone; the original adjective is also converted to its base form
adjectivebase if it is in comparative or superlative form. Expanding on Nannis original
claims, the pattern can be used to evaluate all adjectives18 as well as constructs furnished
with for . . . infinitive complements. The following example demonstrates the patterns
usage:
17

Preliminary experiments have confirmed the effectiveness of the patterns. However, due to sparseness
of samples belonging to this class, they are not included in the reported evaluation.
18
This is based on the observation that compounds such as ready-to-fly (referring to model aircrafts)
exist, and that it is hard to obtain a complete enumeration of the easy-type adjectives.

357

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

[0258:024] The machine uses a single processor, which makes it easier to program
than competing machines using several processors. 
an easy-to-program
The second set consists of two patterns used for comparative analysis with the same
general profile:
that + verbgerund + stub
(9)
where verbgerund is the gerund form of the original infinitive. The complementizer that is
used for the sole purpose of ensuring that verbgerund appears as the subject of a subordinate
clause in all sentences returned by the queries. In other words, phrases such as computer
programming and pattern matching are excluded. For the first pattern, the stub is a
combination of prepositions (currently in and from are chosen); for the second one, a
combination of determiners or the alone is used. For example:
[0258:024] The machine uses a single processor, which makes it easier to program
than competing machines
using)several processors. 
(
in|from
that programming
the
This set of patterns tests the transitivity of the verb in a semantic environment similar
to that of the original sentence. If the verb is used transitively more often, the pattern
with determiners should yield more results, and vice versa. As supported by all preceding
sample sentences, a usually-transitive verb used without an object19 is a good indicator of
missing-object construction and the sentence should be diagnosed as referential.
3.4.4 Query Instantiation
Patterns must be instantiated with information found in original sentences before they are
submitted to a search engine. Considering the general design principles of the system, it is
not advisable to instantiate the patterns with original texts  doing so significantly reduces
the queries coverage. Instead, the object of the matrix verb phrase is truncated and the
matrix verb expanded in order to obtain the desired level of coverage.
The truncation process provides different renditions based on the structure of the original
object:
 Adjective phrases:
Only the head word is used. When the head word is modified by not or too, the
modifier is also retained in order to better support the too . . . to construct and to
maintain compatibility with the semantics of the original text.
 Common noun phrases:
 with a possessive ending/pronoun, or an of -preposition:
The phrase is replaced by $PRPS$ plus the head word. $PRPS$ is either a list of
possessive pronouns or one of those more widely used, depending on caliber of
the search engine used. For example, his location can be expanded to its | my
| our | his | her | their | your location.
19
An omitted object of a preposition (e.g. It is difficult to account for.) has the same effect, but it is
identifiable through syntactic means alone.

358

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

 with determiners:
The phrase is replaced by a choice of $DTA$, $DTTS$, $DTTP$, or a combination
of $DTA$ and $DTTS$, plus the head word. $DTA$ is a list of (or one of the)
general determiners (i.e. a, an, any etc.). $DTTS$ refers to the combination of
the definite article the and the singular demonstratives this and that. $DTTP$ is
the plural counterpart of $DTTS$. The choice is based on the configuration of
the original text so as to maintain semantic compatibility.
 without determiner:
Only the head word is used.
 Proper nouns and pronouns:
The phrase is replaced by $PRP$, which is a list of (or one of the) personal pronouns.
 Prepositional phrases:
The object of the preposition is truncated in a recursive operation.
 Numeric values:
The phrase a lot is used instead.
Matrix verbs are expanded to include both the simple past tense and the third person singular present form with the aid of WordNet and some generic patterns. Where
applicable, particles such as out and up also remain attached to the verb.
Generally speaking, truncation and expansion are good ways of boosting the patterns
coverage. However, the current procedures of truncation are still crude, especially in
their handling of complex phrases. For example, the phrase a reckless course of action
([0198:011]) yields $PRPS$ course, which results in a total loss of the original semantics.
Further enhancements of the truncation process may improve the performance but the
improvement will likely be limited due to the endless possibilities of language usage and
constraints imposed by search engines.
Aside from truncating and expanding the original texts, a stepped-down version of
Pattern II, denoted Pattern II0 , is also provided to further enhance the systems coverage.
The current scheme is to simply replace the extraposed clause with a new stub  to  if the
original extraposed clause is an infinitive, a for . . . infinitive, or a gerund construct. For
example,
[0089:017] It
( is easy to see why the
) ancient art is on the ropes. 
it
is easy to
which/who/this/he
In other situations, no downgraded version is applied.
3.5 Binary Classification of It-extraposition
Five factors are taken into consideration when determining whether the sentence in question
is an it-extraposition:
Estimated popularity of the what-cleft construct (query Pattern I)
denoted as
W = nw  vw
359

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

where nw is the number of results reported by the search engine, and vw is the
percentage of valid instances within the first batch of snippets (usually 10, depending
on the search engine service) returned with the query. Validation is performed with
a case-sensitive regular expression derived from the original query. Since the whatcleft pattern is capitalized at the beginning, the regular expression only looks for
instances appearing at the beginning of a sentence. It is particularly important to
validate the results of what-cleft queries because some search engines can produce
results based on their own interpretation of the original query. For example, Google
returns pages containing Whats found is that for the query What found is that,
which might be helpful for some but is counterproductive for the purpose of this
study.
Result of the comparative expletiveness test (query Pattern II)
denoted as
nX
r=
nit
where nit is the number of results obtained from the original it version of the query,
and nX is the total number of results produced by replacing it with other pronouns
such as which and who. The smaller the ratio r is, the more likely that the sentence
being investigated is an extraposition. Extrapositional sentences usually produce
an r value of 0.1 or less. When both versions of the query yield insufficient results
(max(nit , nX ) < Nmin ), r takes the value Rscarce = 1000. Since it-extrapositions
are relatively rare, it is better to assume that a sentence is not extrapositional when
there is insufficient data to judge otherwise. In the case where nX is sufficient but the
it version of the query produces no result (nX >= Nmin AND nit = 0), r takes the
value Rzero = 100. Values of Rzero and Rscarce are large numbers chosen arbitrarily,
mainly for visualization purposes. In other words both Rzero and Rscarce hint that
the sentence is probably not extrapositional, however neither indicates the degree of
likelihood.
Result of the stepped-down
comparative expletiveness test
n0
0
0
denoted as r0 = nX
0 , where nit and nX are the number of results returned from the
it
it version and the alternate version of the stepped-down queries (c.f. Section 3.4.4,
Page 359). The stepped-down queries are simplified versions of the queries used to
calculate r. Due to this simplification, r0 is usually more sensitive to extrapositions.
However not all queries have stepped-down versions, in which case the original queries
are reused, causing r0 = r. Similar to the way r is defined, r0 also takes the values
Rscarce and Rzero in special situations.
Synthesized expletiveness
A new variable R is defined based on the values of r, nit , nX , and r0 :
(

R=

r, if max(nit , nX )  Nmin ,
r0 , if max(nit , nX ) < Nmin .

If the original queries yield enough results, R takes the value of r since the original
queries better preserve sentence context and are generally more accurate. However,
360

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

when original queries fail, the system resorts to the back-up method of using the
stepped-down queries and bases its judgement on their results instead. Overall, R
can be seen as a synthesized indicator of how the subject pronoun is generally used
in a similar syntactic and semantic setting to that of the original sentence.
Syntactic structure of the sentence
denoted as S, a binary variable indicating if the sentence under investigation belongs
to a syntactic construct that is more prone to generating false-positives. On average
the what-cleft queries yield fewer results and are less reliable since they cannot be
used to provide comparative ratios. However, they are still useful as the last line of
defence to curb the impacts of certain syntactic constructs that repeatedly cause the
comparative expletive tests to produce false-positives. Currently only one construct
is identified  the it verb infinitive construct, as in it helps to have input from
everyone and it expects to post the results tomorrow . Therefore,
(

S=

TRUE, if sentence matches it verb infinitive,
FALSE, otherwise.

The final binary classification of it-extraposition, E, is defined as follows:
(

E=

((R < Rexp ) AND (W > Nmin )), if S = TRUE,
(R < Rexp ),
if S = FALSE.

(10)

where Nmin and Rexp , set to 10 and 0.15 respectively in this study, are threshold constants
chosen based upon empirical observations. In other words, the system recognizes an instance of it as extrapositional if it is unlikely (by comparing R to Rexp ) that an alternative
pronoun is used in its place under the same syntactic and semantic settings. For it verb
infinitive constructs, it is also required that the sentence has a viable what-cleft variant
(by comparing W to Nmin ).
It is worth noting that todays major commercial search engines do not return the exact
number of results for a query but rather their own estimates. The negative effect of this is
somewhat mitigated by basing the final decision on ratios instead of absolute numbers.

4. Case Study
To better illustrate the system work flow, two sample sentences are selected from the WSJ
corpus to be taken through the whole process. The first sample, [0231:015], is classified as
an it-extraposition; the other, [0331:033] (with the preceding sentence providing context),
is a referential case with a nominal antecedent. Some particulars of the implementation are
also discussed here.
[0231:015] A fund manager at a life-insurance company said three factors make
it difficult to read market direction.
[0331:032-033] Her recent report classifies the stock as a hold. But it appears
to be the sort of hold one makes while heading for the door.
361

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

4.1 Syntactic Filtering
First, the syntactic structures of each sentence are identified and dependencies among the
constituents are established, as shown in Figures 3 and 4.

Figure 3: Syntactic structure of [0231:015] (fragment)

Figure 4: Syntactic structure of [0331:033] (fragment). Readings A and B, as indicated in
the DG parse tree, are discussed in the text.

362

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

In sample sentence [0231:015], the expletive it appears as the object of the verb makes and
is followed by the object complement difficult, therefore a virtual copula (tagged VBX) is
created in the dependency tree in order to treat it under the same framework as subject
it-extrapositions. For [0331:033], two different readings are produced  one by assuming
appears to be the matrix verb (reading A, c.f. Figure 4), the other by taking be (reading
B). This is accomplished by drilling down the chain of verbs beginning with the parent
verb of the it node. Once at the top of the chain, the system starts a recursive process to
find verbs and infinitives that are directly attached to the current node and moves down to
the newly found node. The process is interrupted if the current verb node is furnished with
elements other than verbal or adverbial complements/modifiers.
During the filtering process, various components of the sentences are identified, as listed
in Table 2.

Sentence
0231:015
0331:033
0331:033

Reading
A
B

Matrix
Verb
Object
be
difficult
appears
be
sort

Conjunction

THAT

Subordinate
Subject Verb
Object
to read direction
to be
sort
One

Table 2: Component breakdown of the case study samples

4.2 Pattern Instantiation
Using the components identified in Table 2, five queries are generated for each reading,
as listed in Tables 3-5. Patterns II0 -it and II0 -others refer to the stepped-down versions
(c.f. Section 3.4.4, Page 359) of II-it and II-others respectively. The queries shown here are
generated specifically for Google and take advantage of features only available in Google. To
use an alternative search engine such as Yahoo, the component expansions and determiner
lists have to be turned off, and separate queries need to be prepared for individual pronouns.
In order to get accurate results, the queries must be enclosed in double quotes before they
are sent to search engines.

Pattern
I
II-it
II-others
II0 -it
II0 -others

Query
what is|was|s difficult is|was to
it is|was|s difficult to read the|a|an|no|this|these|their|his|our
which|this|who|he is|was|s difficult to read the|a|an|no|this|these|
their|his|our
it is|was|s difficult to
which|this|who|he is|was|s difficult to
Table 3: Queries for [0231:015]
363

Results
1060
3960
153
6.3  106
1.5  105

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

Pattern
I
II-it
II-others
II0 -it
II0 -others

Query
what appears|appeared is|was to
it appears|appeared to be the|a|an|no|this|these|their|his|our
which|this|who|he appears|appeared to be the|a|an|no|this|these|
their|his|our
it appears|appeared to
which|this|who|he appears|appeared to

Results
44
7.5  104
3.2  105
2.2  106
2.6  106

Table 4: Queries for [0331:033], Reading A

Pattern
I
II-it
II-others
II0 -it
II0 -others

Query
what is|was|s its|my|our|his|her|their|your sort is|was that
it is|was|s its|my|our|his|her|their|your sort that the|a|an|no|
this|these|they|we|he|their|his|our
which|this|who|he is|was|s its|my|our|his|her|their|your sort that
the|a|an|no|this|these|they|we|he|their|his|our
Same as II-it
Same as II-others

Results
0
0
0
0
0

Table 5: Queries for [0331:033], Reading B
4.3 Query Results and Classification
For every reading, the number of results for each of the five queries (nw for Pattern I;
nit for II-it; nX for II-others; n0it for II0 -it; and n0X for II0 -others) is obtained from the
search engine; the first 10 results for the what-cleft query are also validated to obtain the
estimated percentage (vw ) of valid constructs. W (= nw  vw ), r(= nX /nit ), r0 (= n0X /n0it ),
and R (choosing between either r or r0 depending on whether max(nit , nX )  10) are then
calculated accordingly, as recorded in Table 6.
Query
[0231:015]
[0331:033].A
[0331:033].B

nw
1060
44
0

vw
70%
0%
-

nit
3960
7.5E4
0

nX
153
3.2E5
0

n0it
6.3E6
2.2E6
0

n0X
1.5E5
2.6E6
0

W
742
0
0

r
0.04
4.3
1000

r0
0.02
1.2
1000

R
0.04
4.3
1000

Table 6: Query results for the case study sample sentences
What appears suspicious is that vw is set to 0 for reading [0331:033].A, which means no
valid instances are found. A quick look at the returned snippets reveals that, indeed, none
of the 10 snippets has the queried contents at the beginning of sentence. Also note that for
reading [0331:033].B, both r and r0 , and consequently R have all been set to Rscarce = 1000
since no query produced enough results.
It can be decided from Table 2 that readings [0231:015] and [0331:033].B do not bear
the it verb infinitive construct, hence S = FALSE; and for [0331:033].A S = TRUE.
Applying Equation 10 in Section 3.5, for [0231:015] and [0331:033].B, the final classification
364

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

E is only based on whether R is sufficiently small (R < 0.15). For [0331:033].A, the system
also needs to check whether the what-cleft query returned sufficient valid results (W > 10).
The final classifications are listed in Table 7.
Sentence
[0231:015]
[0331:033]
[0331:033]

Reading
A
B

W
742
0
0

S
FALSE
TRUE
FALSE

R
0.04
4.3
1000

Ereading
YES
NO
NO

E
YES
NO

Table 7: Final binary classification of the case study sample sentences
Since neither readings of [0331:033] are classified as such, the sentence is not an it-extraposition
construct.

5. Evaluation
In order to provide a comprehensive picture of the systems performance, a twofold assessment is used. In the first evaluation, the system is exposed to the same sentence collection
that assisted its development. Accordingly, results obtained from this evaluation reflect,
to a certain degree, the systems optimal performance. The second evaluation aims at revealing the systems performance on unfamiliar texts by running the developed system on
a random dataset drawn from the rest of the corpus. Two additional experiments are also
conducted to provide an estimation of the systems performance over the whole corpus.
Three performance measures are used throughout the section: precision, recall, and the
balanced F-measure (van Rijsbergen, 1979). Precision is defined as the ratio of correctly
classified instances in a specific category (or a collection of categories) to the number of
instances identified by the system as belonging to the category (categories). In other words,
P
precision is calculated as P = T PT+F
P , where T P and F P are the number of true positives
and false positives respectively. Recall is defined as the ratio of correctly classified instances
in a specific category (or a collection of categories) to the total number of instances in the
P
category (categories), or R = T PT+F
N , where F N denotes the number of false negatives.
Finally, the F-measure is the weighted harmonic mean of precision and recall used to indicate
a systems overall performance. When precision and recall are weighted equally, as used in
R
this study, the balanced F-measure is defined as F = P2P+R
.
Following Efron and Tibshiranis (1993) Bootstrap method, 95% confidence intervals
are obtained using the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of the bootstrap replicates and are
provided alongside the system performance figures to indicate their reliability. The number
of replicates is arbitrarily set at B = 9999, which is much greater than the commonly
suggested value of 1000 (e.g., see Davison & Hinkley, 1997; Efron & Tibshirani, 1993)
because pleonastic instances are sparse. In the case that a precision or recall value is 100%,
the bootstrap percentile method reports an interval of 100%-100%, which makes little sense.
Therefore, in this situation the adjusted Wald interval (Agresti & Coull, 1998) is presented
instead. When two systems are compared, an approximate randomization test (Noreen,
1989) similar to that used by Chinchor (1992) is performed to determine if the difference is
of statistical significance. The significance level  = 0.05 and number of shuffles R = 9999,
both chosen arbitrarily, are used where significance tests are performed.
365

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

5.1 Development Dataset
For the purpose of this study, the first 1000 occurrences of it from the WSJ corpus have been
manually annotated by the authors20 . A part of the set has also been inspected in order
to determine the values of the constants specified in Section 3.5, and to develop the surface
structure processor. The annotation process is facilitated by a custom-designed utility that
displays each sentence within its context represented by a nine-sentence window containing
the six immediately preceding sentences, the original, and the two sentences that follow.
Post-annotation review indicates that this presentation of corpus sentences worked well.
Except for a few (less than 0.5%) cases, the authors found no need to resort to broader
contexts to understand a sentence; and under no circumstances were valid antecedents
located outside the context window while no antecedent was found within it.
Category
Nominal Antecedent
Clause Antecedent
Extraposition
Cleft
Weather/Time
Idiom
Other
Grand Total

Instances
756
60
118
13
9
18
26
1000

Percentage
75.60%
6.00%
11.80%
1.30%
0.90%
1.80%
2.60%
100.00%

Table 8: Profile of the development dataset according to the authors annotation
Table 8 summarizes the distribution of instances in the dataset according to the authors
consensus. The category labeled Other consists mostly of instances that do not fit well
into any other categories, e.g. when the identified nominal antecedent is in plural or the
antecedent is inferred, as well as certain confusing instances. Out of the twenty-six instances,
only two might be remotely recognized as one of the types that interests this study:
[0101:007] And though the size of the loan guarantees approved yesterday is significant, recent experience with a similar program in Central America
indicates that it could take several years before the new Polish government can fully use the aid effectively.
[0296:048] Its just comic when they try to pretend theyre still the master race.
Neither instance can be identified as anaphoric. However, the first construct has neither a
valid non-extraposition version nor a valid what-cleft version, making it difficult to justify
as an extraposition, while the it in the second case is considered to refer to the atmosphere
aroused by the action detailed in the when-clause.
In order to assess whether the pleonastic categories are well-defined and the ability of
ordinary language users to identify pleonastic instances, two volunteers, both native English
speakers, are invited to classify the it instances in the development dataset. To help them
concentrate on the pleonastic categories, the volunteers are only required to assign each
instance to one of the following categories: referential, extraposition, cleft, weather/time,
20

Annotations are published as an online appendix at http://www.ece.ualberta.ca/~musilek/pleo.

zip.

366

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

and idiom. The referential category covers instances with both nominal antecedents and
clause antecedents, as well as instances with inferrable antecedents. Table 9 outlines both
annotators performance in reference to the authors consensus. The degree of agreement
between the annotators, measured by the kappa coefficient (; Cohen, 1960), is also given
in the same table.
Category

Precision

Referential
99.38%
Extraposition
82.54%
Cleft
38.46%
Weather/Time 66.67%
Idiom
39.39%
Overall Accuracy/

Volunteer 1
Recall F-measure

95.49%
88.14%
76.92%
44.44%
72.22%
93.50%

97.40%
85.25%
51.28%
53.33%
50.98%

Precision

96.38%
88.68%
72.73%
75.00%
50.00%

Volunteer 2
Recall F-measure

98.10%
79.66%
61.54%
33.33%
61.11%
94.20%

97.23%
83.93%
66.67%
46.15%
55.00%

a
.749
.795
.369
-.005
.458
.702

a

Except for the Weather/Time category (p = 0.5619), all  values are statistically significant at p <
0.0001.

Table 9: Performance of the volunteer annotators on the development dataset (evaluated
using the authors annotation as reference) and the degree of inter-annotator agreement measured by Cohens kappa (). The authors annotations are refitted to
the simplified annotation scheme used by the volunteers.
There are many factors contributing to the apparently low  values in Table 9, most
notably the skewed distribution of the categories and inappropriate communication of the
classification rules. As Di Eugenio and Glass (2004) and others pointed out, skewed distribution of the categories has a negative effect on the  value. Since the distribution of
the it instances in the dataset is fairly unbalanced, the commonly-accepted guideline for
interpreting  values ( > 0.67 and  > 0.8 as thresholds for tentative and definite conclusions respectively; Krippendorff, 1980) may not be directly applicable in this case. In
addition, the classification rules are communicated to the annotators orally through examples and some of the not-so-common cases, such as the object it-extrapositions, might not
have been well understood by both annotators. Another interesting note about the results
is that there is a strong tendency for both annotators (albeit on different cases) to classify
it-clefts as it-extrapositions. Rather than taking this as a sign that the cleft category is not
well-defined, we believe it reflects the inherent difficulties in identifying instances pertaining
to the category.
5.2 Baselines
Two baselines are available for comparison  the WSJ annotation, which is done manually
and provided with the corpus; and the results from a replication of Paice and Husks (1987)
algorithm (PHA). It should be cautioned that, given the subjectivity of the issues discussed
in this paper and lack of consensus on certain topics in the field of linguistics, recall ratios of
the presented baseline results and the forthcoming results of the proposed system should not
be compared quantitatively. For example, the original Paice and Husk algorithm does not
recognize certain types of object extrapositions and does not always distinguish between
367

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

individual types of pleonastic it; and the WSJ corpus has neither special annotation for
parenthetical it (c.f. Section 3.2.1, Page 348, [0239:009]) nor an established annotation
policy for certain types of object extrapositions (Bies, Ferguson, Katz, & MacIntyre, 1995).
No attempts have been made to correct these issues.
Table 10 summarizes the performance of the baselines on the development dataset. As
expected, Paice and Husks (1987) algorithm does not perform very well since the WSJ
articles are very different from, and tend to be more sophisticated than, the technical
essays that the algorithm was designed for. Compared to the originally reported precision
of 93% and recall of 96%, the replicated PHA yields only 54% and 75% respectively on the
development dataset. The performance of the replica is largely in line with what Boyd et al.
(2005) obtained from their implementation of the same algorithm on a different dataset.

Measurement
Reference
Identified by Baseline
Baseline True Positives
Precision
Recall
F-measure

WSJ Annotation
Extraposition
Cleft
118
13
88
12
87b
12
98.86%
100%
73.73% 92.31%
84.47% 96.00%

Replicated PHA
Overalla
140
194
105
54.12%
75.00%
62.87%

a

Includes clefts, extrapositions, and time/weather cases.
Based on manual inspection, two cases originally annotated as extrapositional in WSJ are
determined as inappropriate. See discussions below.
b

Table 10: Performance of the baselines on the development dataset, evaluated against the
authors annotation.
The 31 (118  87) extrapositional cases that are not annotated in WSJ can be broken
down into the following categories followed by their respective number of instances:
Category
Unrecognized
Object without complement
Parenthetical
Inappropriate non-extraposition
Agentless passive
it seems/appears . . .
it be worth . . .
Others
Valid non-extraposition
too . . . to
Others
Total

Items
3
1
2
18
9
4
2
3
10
2
8
31

Table 11: Profile of the false negatives in the WSJ annotation in reference to the authors
annotation
368

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

By stating that the Characteristic of it extraposition is that the final clause can replace
it, Bies et al. (1995) define the class in the narrowest sense. Since interpretation of the
definition is entirely a subjective matter, there is no way of determining the real coverage
of the annotations. However, from the portions of the corpus that have been reviewed, the
practice of annotation is not entirely consistent.
Two sentences are marked as extraposition in the corpus but the annotators consensus
indicates otherwise. Considering the golden standard status of the WSJ corpus, they are
also listed here:
[0277:040] Moreover, as a member of the Mitsubishi group, which is headed by
one of Japans largest banks, it is sure to win a favorable loan.
[0303:006] It is compromises such as this that convince Washingtons liberals
that if they simply stay the course, this administration will stray
from its own course on this and other issues.
The first sentence is considered dubious and most likely referring to the company that is a
member of the Mitsubishi group. The second one is considered a cleft and is actually also
marked as cleft in the corpus. Since it is the only case in the corpus with both annotations,
the extraposition marking was considered a mistake and was manually removed.
The Paice and Husk (1987) algorithm suffers from false-positive it . . . that and it . . . to
construct detection, which may be fixed by incorporating part-of-speech and phrase structure information together with additional rules. However, such fixes will greatly complicate
the original system.
5.3 Results
On the development dataset, results produced by the proposed system are as follows:
Extraposition
118
116
113

Cleft
13
13
13

Weather/Time
9
10
9

Overalla
140
139
136

Precision
95% C.I.b

97.41%
94.07-100.00%

100.00%
79.74-100.00%

90.00%
66.67-100.00%

97.84%
95.21-100.00%

Recall
95% C.I.b

95.76%
91.79-99.12%

100.00%
79.74-100.00%

100.00%
73.07-100.00%

97.14%
93.98-99.34%

F-measure
95% C.I.

96.58%
93.98-98.72%

100.00%
-

94.74%
80.00-100.00%

97.49%
95.45-99.21%

Measurement
Reference
Identified
True Positives

a
b

Combining extraposition, cleft, and weather/time into one category.
Adjusted Wald intervals are reported for extreme measurements.

Table 12: Performance of the system on the development dataset, evaluated using the authors annotation as reference.

369

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

Further statistical significance tests reveal more information regarding the systems performance in comparison to that of the two volunteers and the baselines:
 Compared to both volunteer annotators, the systems better performance in all three
pleonastic categories is statistically significant.
 In the extraposition category, the difference between the WSJ annotations (higher)
precision and that of the system is not statistically significant.
 Compared to Paice and Husks (1987) algorithm, the systems higher precision is
statistically significant.

Target System
Volunteer 1
Volunteer 2
WSJ Annotation
Replicated PHA

Extraposition

Cleft

Weather/Time

F-measure+ /p < .001 F-measure+ /p < .001 F-measure+ /p = .033
F-measure+ /p < .001 F-measure+ /p = .007 F-measure+ /p = .025
Precision /p = .630 F-measure+ /p = 1.00
(All Categories) Precision+ /p < .001

Table 13: Results of the statistical significance tests presented in the format
Test Statisticsign /p-value. A plus sign (+ ) indicates that our system performs
better on the reported measurement; otherwise a minus sign ( ) is used. If fair
comparisons can be made for both precision and recall, the F-measure is used as
the test statistic; otherwise the applicable measurement is reported.

Using the authors annotation as reference, the system outperforms both human volunteers. While higher performance is usually desirable, in this particular case, it could
indicate possible problems in the design of the experiment. Since the English language is
not only used by its speakers but also shaped by the same group of people, it is impractical to have a system that speaks better English than its human counterparts do. One
plausible clue to the paradox is that an analytic approach is needed to gain insight into
the issue of pronoun classification, but the casual English speakers do not see it from that
perspective. As Green and Hecht (1992) and many others indicated, capable users of a
language do not necessarily have the ability to formulate linguistic rules. However, these
kinds of analytic skills is a prerequisite in order to explicitly classify a pronoun into one of
the many categories. Thus, the true performance of casual speakers can only be measured
by their ability to comprehend or produce the various pleonastic constructs. In addition,
other factors, such as time constraints and imperfections in how the category definitions
are conveyed, may also play a role in limiting the volunteers performance. The authors
annotation, on the other hand, is much less influenced by such issues and is therefore considered expert opinion in this experiment. As shown in Section 5.2, the WSJ annotation of
extrapositions and clefts, which is also considered expert opinion, is highly compatible with
that of the authors. The differences between the two annotations can mostly be attributed
to the narrower definition of extraposition adopted by the WSJ annotators. Therefore, the
WSJ annotations precision of 98.86% for extrapositions (when verified against the authors
370

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

annotation) is probably a more appropriate hint of the upper-limit for practically important
system performance.
In the extraposition category, 279 individual cases passed the syntactic filters and were
evaluated by search engine queries. Results of queries are obtained from Google through its
web service, the Google SOAP21 Search API. All three (116  113) cases of false-positives
are caused by missing-object constructions and can be corrected using the patterns detailed
in Section 3.4.3.
The five (118  113) false-negative cases are listed below:
[0283:013] The newspaper said it is past time for the Soviet Union to create
unemployment insurance and retraining programs like those of the
West.
[0209:040] Its one thing to say you can sterilize, and another to then successfully pollinate the plant, he said.
[0198:011] Sen. Kennedy said . . . but that it would be a reckless course of
action for President Bush to claim the authority without congressional approval.
[0290:049] Worse, it remained to a well-meaning but naive president of the
United States to administer the final infamy upon those who fought
and died in Vietnam.
[0085:047] Its not easy to roll out something that comprehensive, and make
it pay, Mr. Jacob says.
Sentence [0283:013] is misplaced as weather/time. Sentence [0209:040] is not properly handled by the syntactic processing subcomponent. Sentences [0198:011] and [0290:049] involve
complex noun phrases (underlined) at the object position of the matrix verbs  it is very
difficult to reduce them to something more generic, such as the head noun only or a pronoun, and still remain confident that the original semantics are maintained. The last case,
sentence [0085:047], fails because the full queries (containing part of the subordinate clause)
failed to yield enough results and the stepped-down versions are overwhelmed by noise.
The last four false-negatives are annotated correctly in the WSJ corpus. The systems
recall ratio on the 87 verified WSJ extraposition annotations is therefore 95.40%, comparable
to the overall recall.
5.4 System Performance on Parser Output
Thus far, the system has been evaluated based on the assumption that the underlying
sentences are tagged and parsed with (almost) perfect accuracy. Much effort has been
made to reduce such dependency. For example, tracing information and function tags in the
original phrase structures are deliberately discarded; and the system also tries to search for
possible extraposed or cleft clauses that are marked as complements to the matrix object.
However, deficiencies in tagging and parsing may still impact the systems performance.
Occasionally, even the golden standard manual markups appear problematic and happen
to get in the way of the task.
21

The Simple Object Access Protocol is an XML-based message protocol for web services.

371

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

It is therefore necessary to evaluate the system on sentences that are automatically
tagged and parsed in order to answer the question of how well it would perform in the
real world. Two state-of-the-art parsers are employed for this study: the reranking parser
by Charniak and Johnson (2005), and the Berkeley parser by Petrov, Barrett, Thibaux,
and Klein (2006). The systems performance on their respective interpretations of the
development dataset sentences are reported in Tables 14 and 15. Table 16 further compares
the systems real-world performance to the various baselines.
Measurement
Reference
Identified
True Positives
Precision
95% C.I.b
Recall
95% C.I.b
F-measure
95% C.I.
a
b

Extraposition
118
114
110
96.49%
92.68-99.20%
93.22%
88.43-97.41%
94.83%
91.60-97.49%

Cleft
13
12
12
100.00%
78.40-100.00%
92.31%
73.33-100.00%
96.00%
84.62-100.00%

Weather/Time
9
10
9
90.00%
66.67-100.00%
100.00%
73.07-100.00%
94.74%
80.00-100.00%

Overalla
140
136
132
97.06%
93.92-99.32%
94.29%
90.18-97.81%
95.65%
93.08-97.90%

Combining extraposition, cleft, and weather/time into one category.
Adjusted Wald intervals are reported for extreme measurements.

Table 14: Performance of the system on the development dataset parsed by the Charniak
parser, using the authors annotation as reference.

Extraposition
118
114
111

Cleft
13
11
10

Weather/Time
9
9
8

Overalla
140
134
130

Precision
95% C.I.

97.37%
94.07-100.00%

90.91%
70.00-100.00%

88.89%
62.50-100.00%

97.01%
93.81-99.32%

Recall
95% C.I.

94.07%
89.47-98.18%

76.92%
50.00-100.00%

88.89%
62.50-100.00%

92.86%
88.44-96.91%

F-measure
95% C.I.

95.69%
92.75-98.17%

83.33%
62.50-96.55%

88.89%
66.67-100.00%

94.89%
92.02-97.35%

Measurement
Reference
Identified
True Positives

a

Combining extraposition, cleft, and weather/time into one category.

Table 15: Performance of the system on the development dataset parsed by the Berkeley
parser, using the authors annotation as reference.

372

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

Comparing System Performance On Charniak Parser Output to:
Target System
Extraposition
Cleft
Weather/Time


System w/o Parser F-measure /p = .131 F-measure /p = 1.00 F-measure= /p = 1.00
Volunteer 1
F-measure+ /p = .001 F-measure+ /p < .001 F-measure+ /p = .030
Volunteer 2
F-measure+ /p < .001 F-measure+ /p = .041 F-measure+ /p = .021
WSJ Annotation
Precision /p = .368 F-measure= /p = 1.00
Replicated PHA
(All Categories) Precision+ /p < .001
Comparing System Performance On Berkeley Parser Output to:
Target System
Extraposition
Cleft
Weather/Time


System w/o Parser F-measure /p = .380 F-measure /p = .128 F-measure /p = 1.00
Volunteer 1
F-measure+ /p < .001 F-measure+ /p = .014 F-measure+ /p = .061
Volunteer 2
F-measure+ /p < .001 F-measure+ /p = .314 F-measure+ /p = .046
WSJ Annotation
Precision /p = .627 F-measure /p = .374
Replicated PHA
(All Categories) Precision+ /p < .001
Table 16: Results of the statistical significance tests comparing the systems performance
on parser output to that of various other systems, presented in the format
Test Statisticsign /p-value. A plus sign (+ ) indicates that the proposed system
performs better than the target system on the reported measurement; an equal
sign (= ) indicates a tie; otherwise a minus sign ( ) is used. If fair comparisons
can be made for both precision and recall, the F-measure is used as the test
statistic; otherwise the applicable measurement is reported.

Further significance tests reveal that:
 using a parser has no statistically significant influence on the systems performance;
 the system outperforms both volunteer annotators in identifying it-extrapositions;
 regardless of the parser used, the difference between the systems performance and
that of the WSJ annotation is not statistically significant; and
 regardless of the parser used, the system outperforms the Paice and Husk (1987)
algorithm.
5.5 Correlation Analysis for Extrapositions
Figures 5 through 8 illustrate the correlation between the decision factors and the true
expletiveness of the pronoun it in question. All 279 items that passed the initial syntactic
filtering process are included in the dataset with the first 116 being extrapositional and
the rest separated by a break on the X-axis. This arrangement is made in order to better
visualize the contrast between the positive group and the negative group. In Figures 6
through 8, different grey levels are used to indicate the number of results returned by
queries  the darker the shade, the more popular the construct in question is on the web.
The constant Rexp = 0.15 is also indicated with a break on the Y-axis.
373

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

As illustrated, all factors identified in Section 3.5 are good indicators of expletiveness. W
(Figure 5) is the weakest of the four factors due to the number of false positives produced by
incorrect language usage. This is clear evidence that the web is noisier than ordinary corpora
and that the results counts from the web may not be appropriate as the sole decision-making
factor. In comparison, r (Figure 6) has almost perfect correlation with the expletiveness
of instances. However, full versions of the queries usually return fewer results and in many
cases yield too few results for expletive cases (unfilled items plotted on top of the graph
indicate cases that do not have enough results, c.f. Section 3.5). The stepped-down versions
of the queries (Figure 7), while being less accurate by themselves, serve well when used as
back up, as illustrated by the R plot (Figure 8). Part of the false-positive outliers on the
R plot are produced by full queries for expressions that are habitually associated with it,
such as [0135:002]  . . . said it expects to post sales in the current fiscal year . . . . When
used with a pronoun, these expressions usually describe information quoted from a person
or organization already named earlier in the same sentence, making it a more natural
choice of subject pronoun. Normally the problematic expressions take the form of verb
infinitive-complement, i.e. S=TRUE. According to the decision process described in
Section 3.5, W is also considered in this situation, which effectively eliminates such noise.

374

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

Figure 5: A scatter plot illustrating the correlation between W (the estimated number of
valid results returned by the what-cleft queries) and the expletiveness of the it
instance. The extrapositional instances are arranged on the left side of the plot
and the rest of the cases are on the right. If a query returns no valid results, the
corresponding item is shown as a hollow circle on the bottom of the plot.

375

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

Number
of
Results

Figure 6: A scatter plot illustrating the correlation between r (the ratio of the hit count
produced by the expression with substitute pronouns to that of the original expression) and the expletiveness of the it instance. The extrapositional instances
are arranged on the left side of the plot and the rest of the cases are to the right.
The items are shaded according to the hit counts produced by the corresponding
original expressions. If a query returns insufficient results, the corresponding item
is shown as a hollow unshaded circle on the top of the plot.

376

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

Number
of
Results

Figure 7: A scatter plot illustrating the correlation between r0 (similar to r but for the
stepped-down queries) and the expletiveness of the it instance. The extrapositional instances are arranged on the left side of the plot and the rest of the cases
are to the right. The items are shaded according to the hit counts produced by
the corresponding original expressions. If a query returns insufficient results, the
corresponding item is shown as a hollow unshaded circle on the top of the plot.

377

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

Number
of
Results

Figure 8: A scatter plot illustrating the correlation between R (synthesized expletiveness;
it takes the value of r if the more complex queries produce enough results, and
takes the value of r0 when they fail to do so) and the expletiveness of the it
instance. The extrapositional instances are arranged on the left side of the plot
and the rest of the cases are to the right. The items are shaded according to the
hit counts produced by the corresponding original expressions. If a query returns
insufficient results, the corresponding item is shown as a hollow unshaded circle
on the top of the plot.

5.6 Generalization Study
In order to evaluate how well the system generalizes, 500 additional sample sentences are
randomly selected from the rest of the WSJ corpus as the test dataset. The distribution of
instances is comparable to that of the development dataset, as shown in Table 17.
378

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

Category
Nominal Antecedent
Clause Antecedent
Extraposition
Cleft
Weather/Time
Idiom
Other
Grand Total

Instances
375
24
63
8
6
11
13
500

Percentage
75.00%
4.80%
12.60%
1.60%
1.20%
2.20%
2.60%
100.00%

Table 17: Profile of the test dataset according to the authors annotation
As shown in Table 18, the overall level of inter-annotator agreement is slightly higher
than that of the development dataset. Except for the idiom category, categorical  values
are also higher than their counterparts on the development dataset. This discrepancy is
most likely due to chance, since the two volunteers worked independently and started from
different datasets (Volunteer 1 started from the development dataset and Volunteer 2 started
from the test dataset).
Category

Precision

Referential
98.48%
Extraposition
87.10%
Cleft
29.41%
Weather/Time 100.00%
Idiom
31.82%
Overall Accuracy/
a

Volunteer 1
Recall F-measure

95.12%
85.71%
62.50%
50.00%
53.85%
91.80%

96.77%
86.40%
40.00%
66.67%
40.00%

Precision

97.30%
80.00%
57.14%
100.00%
47.06%

Volunteer 2
Recall F-measure

96.83%
82.54%
50.00%
50.00%
61.54%
92.80%

97.07%
81.25%
53.33%
66.67%
53.33%

a
.797
.811
.490
.665
.280
.720

All  values are statistically significant at p < 0.0001.

Table 18: Performance of the volunteer annotators on the test dataset (evaluated using the
authors annotation as reference) and the degree of inter-annotator agreement
measured by Cohens kappa (). The authors annotations are refitted to the
simplified annotation scheme used by the volunteers.

Measurement
Reference
Identified by Baseline
Baseline True Positives
Precision
Recall
F-measure
a

WSJ Annotation
Extraposition
Cleft
63
8
54
6
52
6
96.30% 100.00%
82.54%
75.00%
88.89%
85.71%

Replicated PHA
Overalla
77
97
55
56.70%
71.43%
63.22%

Includes clefts, extrapositions, and time/weather cases.

Table 19: Performance of the baselines on the test dataset, evaluated against the authors
annotation.
379

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

Table 19 summarizes the performance of the baselines on the test dataset. The two
(54  52) false-positive extrapositions from the WSJ annotation are listed below together
with their respective context:
[1450:054-055] Another solution cities might consider is giving special priority
to police patrols of small-business areas. For cities losing business to
suburban shopping centers, it may be a wise business investment to
help keep those jobs and sales taxes within city limits.
[1996:061-062] You think you can go out and turn things around. Its a tough
thing when you cant.
The first case is considered referential, and the it in the second case is believed to refer to
a hypothetical situation introduced by the when-clause.
5.6.1 Performance Analysis
On the test dataset, the system is able to maintain its precision; it exhibits slight deterioration in recall but the overall performance is still within expectations. The findings are
summarized in Table 20.
Extraposition
63
60
58

Cleft
8
6
6

Weather/Time
6
7
6

Overalla
77
73
70

Precision
95% C.I.b

96.67%
91.38-100.00%

100.00%
64.26-100%

85.71%
50.00-100.00%

95.89%
90.77-100.00%

Recall
95% C.I.b

92.06%
84.85-98.25%

75.00%
40.00-100.00%

100.00%
64.26-100.00%

90.91%
84.15-97.01%

F-measure
95% C.I.

94.31%
89.60-98.11%

85.71%
57.14-100.00%

92.31%
66.67-100.00%

93.33%
88.75-97.10%

Measurement
Reference
Identified
True Positives

a
b

Combining extraposition, cleft, and weather/time into one category.
Adjusted Wald intervals are reported for extreme measurements.

Table 20: Performance of the system on the test dataset, evaluated using the authors
annotation as reference.

149 instances were evaluated for extraposition using queries, covering 62 of the 63 extrapositions. The excluded case is introduced in the form of a direct question, whose particulars
the syntactic processing subsystem is not prepared for. Of the other four false negatives,
three involve noun phrases at the matrix object position. One of the two clefts that are not
recognized arises out of imperfect processing in the corpus. In addition, the false positive
in the weather/time category is caused by the verb hail , which was treated as a noun by
the system.
All five (63  58) false-negative extraposition cases are annotated in the corpus and the
WSJ annotation agrees with the six clefts identified by the proposed system. Thus the
380

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

systems recall ratio on the verified WSJ annotations is 90.38% for extraposition and 100%
for cleft.
Target System
Volunteer 1
Volunteer 2
WSJ Annotation
Replicated PHA

Extraposition

Cleft

Weather/Time

F-measure+ /p = .041 F-measure+ /p = .005 F-measure+ /p = .248
F-measure+ /p = .002 F-measure+ /p = .119 F-measure+ /p = .254
Precision /p = .697 F-measure= /p = 1.00
(All Categories) Precision+ /p < .001

Table 21: Results of the statistical significance tests, presented in the format
Test Statisticsign /p-value. A plus sign (+ ) indicates that our system performs
better on the reported measurement; an equal sign (= ) indicates a tie; otherwise
a minus sign ( ) is used. If fair comparisons can be made for both precision
and recall, the F-measure is used as the test statistic; otherwise the applicable
measurement is reported.

Measurement
Reference
Identified
True Positives

Performance on Charniak Parser Output
Extraposition
Cleft Weather/Time
63
8
6
58
7
7
55
6
6

Overalla
77
72
67

Precision
95% C.I.

94.83%
88.24-100.00%

85.71%
50.00-100.00%

85.71%
50.00-100.00%

93.06%
86.36-98.51%

Recall
95% C.I.b

87.30%
78.26-95.08%

75.00%
37.50-100.00%

100.00%
64.26-100.00%

87.01%
78.95-94.12%

F-measure
95% C.I.

90.91%
84.75-95.77%

80.00%
50.00-100.00%

92.31%
66.67-100.00%

89.93%
84.30-94.57%

Performance on Berkeley Parser Output
Extraposition
Cleft Weather/Time
63
8
6
58
5
7
56
5
6

Overalla
77
70
67

Measurement
Reference
Identified
True Positives
Precision
95% C.I.b

96.55%
91.11-100.00%

100.00%
59.90-100.00%

85.71%
50.00-100.00%

95.71%
90.28-100.00%

Recall
95% C.I.b

88.89%
80.60-96.23%

62.50%
25.00-100.00%

100.00%
64.26-100.00%

87.01%
79.22-93.90%

F-measure
95% C.I.

92.56%
87.14-96.97%

76.92%
40.00-100.00%

92.31%
66.67-100.00%

91.16%
85.94-95.52%

a
b

Combining extraposition, cleft, and weather/time into one category.
Adjusted Wald intervals are reported for extreme measurements.

Table 22: Performance of the system on the test dataset using parser-generated output,
evaluated using the authors annotation as reference.
381

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

Results of the significance tests, summarized in Table 21, reveal the following additional
information about the systems performance on the test dataset:
 the systems higher performance in recognizing it-extrapositions than both volunteers
is statistically significant;
 in the extraposition category, the difference between WSJ annotations (higher) precision and that of the system is not statistically significant; and
 the system outperforms the Paice and Husk (1987) algorithm, and the difference is
statistically significant.
Tables 22 and 23 outline the systems performance on the test dataset when parsers
are used. Again, both parsers cause slight deteriorations in system performance. However,
such changes are not statistically significant. With either parser used, the system is able to
perform as well as the WSJ annotations.
Comparing System Performance On Charniak Parser Output to:
Target System
Extraposition
Cleft
Weather/Time


System w/o Parser F-measure /p = .125 F-measure /p = 1.00 F-measure= /p = 1.00
Volunteer 1
F-measure+ /p = .298 F-measure+ /p = .013 F-measure+ /p = .247
Volunteer 2
F-measure+ /p = .022 F-measure+ /p = .269 F-measure+ /p = .246
WSJ Annotation
Precision /p = .886 F-measure /p = 1.00
Replicated PHA
(All Categories) Precision+ /p < .001
Comparing System Performance On Berkeley Parser Output to:
Target System
Extraposition
Cleft
Weather/Time
System w/o Parser F-measure /p = .501 F-measure /p = 1.00 F-measure= /p = 1.00
Volunteer 1
F-measure+ /p = .131 F-measure+ /p = .035 F-measure+ /p = .256
Volunteer 2
F-measure+ /p = .009 F-measure+ /p = .308
F-measure+ /p = .27


WSJ Annotation
Precision /p = .809 F-measure /p = 1.00
Replicated PHA
(All Categories) Precision+ /p < .001
Table 23: Results of the statistical significance tests comparing the systems performance
on parser output to that of various other systems, presented in the format
Test Statisticsign /p-value. A plus sign (+ ) indicates that the source system performs better on the reported measurement; an equal sign (= ) indicates a tie;
otherwise a minus sign ( ) is used. If fair comparisons can be made for both
precision and recall, the F-measure is used as the test statistic; otherwise the
applicable measurement is reported.

5.6.2 Estimated System Performance on the Whole Corpus
The relative sparseness of clefts makes it hard to assess the real effectiveness of the proposed
approach. To compensate for this, an approximate study is conducted. First, it instances in
the whole corpus are processed automatically using the proposed approach. The identified
382

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

cleft instances are then merged with those that are already annotated in the corpus to
form an evaluation dataset of 84 sentences, which is subsequently verified manually. 76
instances out of the 84 are considered to be valid cleft constructs by the authors. Respective
performances of the proposed approach and the WSJ annotation are reported in Table 24;
the differences are not statistically significant.
System
WSJ

Proposed
Approach

Total
76

Identified
66

Common
Precision
63
95.45%
95% C.I.: 89.55-100.00%

Recalla
82.94%
74.32-90.79%

F-measurea
88.73%
82.86-93.79%

76

75

70
93.33%
95% C.I.: 87.50-98.65%

92.11%
85.53-97.40%

92.72%
87.84-96.65%

a

The reported recall ratios and F-measures are for the synthetic dataset only and cannot be extended
to the whole corpus.

Table 24: Estimated system performance on it-cleft identification over the entire corpus
Three of the false positives produced by the proposed approach are actually extrapositions22 , which is expected (c.f. Footnote 12, Page 351). Thus, in a binary classification
of pleonastic it, items in the cleft category will have higher contributions to the overall
precision than they do for their own category. Until the whole corpus is annotated, it is
impossible to obtain precise recall figures of either the WSJ annotations or the proposed
approach. However, since the rest of the corpus (other than the synthetic dataset) does not
contain any true positives for either system and contains the same number of false-negatives
for both systems, the proposed system will maintain a higher recall ratio than that of the
WSJ annotations on the whole corpus.
A similar experiment is conducted for extrapositions using sentences that are already
annotated in the corpus. All 656 annotated extrapositional it instances are manually verified
and 637 (97.10%) of them turn out to be valid cases. The system produced queries for 623
instances and consequently recognized 575 of them, translating into 90.27% (95% C.I. 89.0193.56%) recall ratio on the verified annotations. Given the fact that on both the development
dataset and the test dataset the proposed system yields slightly higher recall on the whole
dataset than it does on the subsets identified by WSJ annotations, its performance for
extrapositions on the whole WSJ corpus is likely to remain above 90% in recall.
Similar to the situation in the test based on random cases, a large portion of falsepositives are contributed by imperfect handling of both surface structures and noun phrases
in the matrix object position, particularly in the form of it takes/took . . . to . . . From
additional experiments, it seems that this particular construct can be addressed with a
different pattern, what/whatever it takes to verb, which eliminates the noun phrase.
Alternatively, the construct could possibly be assumed as extrapositional without issuing
queries at all.
22
This kind of cleft can be separated from extrapositions using an additional pattern that attaches the
prepositional phrase to the subordinate verb. However, the number of samples are too few to justify its
inclusion in the study.

383

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

6. Discussion
In this paper a novel pleonastic-it identification system is proposed. Unlike its precursors,
the system classifies extrapositions by submitting queries to the web and analyzing returned
results. A set of rules are also proposed for classification of clefts, whose particular manner
of composition makes it more difficult to apply the web-based approach. Components of the
proposed system are simple and their effectiveness should be independent of the type of text
being processed. As shown in the generalization tests, the system maintains its precision
while recall degrades by only a small margin when confronted with unfamiliar texts. This
is an indication that the general principles behind the system are not over-fitted to the text
from which they were derived. Overall, when evaluated on WSJ news articles  which can
be considered a difficult type of nonfiction  the system is capable of producing results
that are on par with or only slightly inferior to that of casually trained humans.
The systems success has important implications beyond the particular problem of
pleonastic-it identification. First, it shows that the web can be used to answer linguistic questions that are based upon more than just simplistic semantic relationships. Second,
the comparative study is an effective means to get highly accurate results from the web despite the fact that it is noisier than the manually compiled corpora. In addition, the success
of the simple guidelines used in identifying clefts may serve as evidence that a speakers
intention can be heavily reflected by the surface structures of her utterance, in a bid to
make it distinguishable from similarly constructed sentences.
Some problems are left unaddressed in the current study, most notably the handling
of complex noun phrases and prepositional phrases. Generally speaking, its approach to
query instantiation is somewhat crude. To solve the noun-phrase issue, a finer-grained query
downgrading is proposed, viz. first to supply the query with the original noun phrase, then
the head noun, and finally the adjective that modifies the head noun, if there is one. The
effectiveness of this approach is to be determined. As discussed in Section 5.6.2, a special
rule can be used for the verb take. This, however, may open the door to exception-based
processing, which contradicts the principle of the system to provide a unified approach to
pleonastic pronoun identification. Overall, much more data and further experiments are
needed before the query instantiation procedures can be finalized.
Aside from the two sets of patterns that are currently in use, other information can
be used to assess the validity of a possible extraposition. For example, in extrapositions
the matrix verbs are much more likely to remain in present tense than past tense, the
noun phrases (if any) at the matrix object position are more likely to be indefinite, and
the extraposed clauses are generally longer than the matrix verb phrases. A fuzzy-based
decision system with multiple input variables could possibly provide significant performance
gains.
Although the system is able to yield reasonable performances on the output of either
parser tested, both of them introduce additional errors to the final results. On the combined
dataset of development and test items, both parsers cause statistically significant deteriorations in performance at a significance level of 0.1 (Charniak parser: p=0.008 for F-measure
on extrapositions; p=0.071 for F-measure on clefts). It is possible that incorporating a
pattern-based method will compensate for the problems caused by imperfect parsing and
further improve recall ratios; however, more data is needed to confirm this.
384

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

Another concern is that the syntactic processing component used in the system is limited.
This limitation, caused by the designers lack of exposure to a large variety of different
constructs, is essentially different from the problem imposed by the limited number of
patterns in some previous systems. Eventually, for the proposed system, this limitation can
be eliminated. To illustrate, the current design is not able to correctly process sentences like
what difference does it make which I buy; however, it only takes minor effort to correct this
by upgrading the subsystem so that it recognizes pre-posed objects. Each such upgrade,
which may be performed manually or even automatically through some machine-learning
approaches, solves one or more syntactic problems and moves the system closer to being able
to recognize all grammatically valid constructs. In contrast, it will take considerably more
effort to patch the rigidly defined rules or to upgrade the word lists before the rule-based
systems can achieve comparable performances.
During the writing of this article, Google deprecated their SOAP-based search API. This
move makes it technically difficult to precisely replicate the results reported in this study
since other search engines lack the ability to process alternate expressions (i.e. WordA OR
WordB ) embedded within a quoted query. To use a different search engine, the matrix verbs
should not be expanded but should instead be converted to their respective third-person
singular present form only. Stubs should also be in their simplest form only, as described
in earlier sections. From preliminary experiments it also seems possible to replace the
combination of which/who/this/he with they alone, plus some necessary changes to maintain
number agreement among the constituents of the queries. These changes may have some
negative effects on the final outcome of the system, but they are unlikely to be severe.
Like most other NLP tasks, classifying the usage of it is inherently difficult, even for
human annotators who already have some knowledge about the problem  it is one thing
to speak the language, and another to then clearly explain the rationale behind a specific
construct. Although it is widely accepted that an extrapositional it is expletive, the line
between extrapositional cases and referential ones can sometimes be very thin. This is
clearly manifested by the existence of truncated extrapositions (Gundel et al., 2005), which
obviously have valid referential readings. Similar things can be said about the relationship
among all three pleonastic categories as well as idioms. For example, Paice and Husk classify
it remains to . . .  as an idiom while the same construct is classified as an extraposition
in our evaluations. Aside from applying the syntactic guidelines proposed in this study, it
is assumed during the annotation process that an extraposition should have either a valid
non-extraposed reading or a valid what-cleft reading. It is also assumed that a cleft should
generate a valid non-clefted reading by joining the clefted constituent directly to the cleft
clause without any leading relative pronoun or adverb. In light of the subjective nature
of the problem, our annotations are published on the web as an online appendix to better
serve readers.

References
Agresti, A., & Coull, B. A. (1998). Approximate is better than exact for interval estimation of binomial proportions. The American Statistician, 52 (2), 119126.
Berland, M., & Charniak, E. (1999). Finding parts in very large corpora. In Proceedings of the 37th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics on
385

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

Computational Linguistics, pp. 5764.
Bies, A., Ferguson, M., Katz, K., & MacIntyre, R. (1995). Bracketing guidelines for Treebank II style. Tech. rep. MS-CIS-95-06, Department of Computer and Information
Science, University of Pennsylvania.
Boyd, A., Gegg-Harrison, W., & Byron, D. (2005). Identifying non-referential it: A machine
learning approach incorporating linguistically motivated patterns. In Proceedings of
the ACL Workshop on Feature Engineering for Machine Learning in Natural Language
Processing, pp. 4047. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Charniak, E., & Johnson, M. (2005). Coarse-to-fine n-best parsing and maxent discriminative reranking. In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL05), pp. 173180, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Chinchor, N. (1992). The statistical significance of the MUC-4 results. In Proceedings of
the 4th conference on Message understanding (MUC4), pp. 3050, San Mateo, CA.
Morgan Kaufmann.
Cimiano, P., Schmidt-Thieme, L., Pivk, A., & Staab, S. (2005). Learning taxonomic relations from heterogeneous evidence. In Buitelaar, P., Cimiano, P., & Magnini, B.
(Eds.), Ontology Learning from Text: Methods, Applications and Evaluation, Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications, pp. 5973. IOS Press, Amsterdam.
Clemente, J. C., Torisawa, K., & Satou, K. (2004). Improving the identification of nonanaphoric it using support vector machines. In Proceedings of the International
Joint Workshop on Natural Language Processing in Biomedicine and its Applications
(NLPBA/BioNLP04).
Cohen, J. (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 20 (1), 3746.
Collins, M. (1999). Head-Driven Statistical Models for Natural Language Parsing. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Pennsylvania.
Davidse, K. (2000). A constructional approach to clefts. Linguistics, 38 (6), 11011131.
Davison, A. C., & Hinkley, D. V. (1997). Bootstrap Methods and Their Application. Cambridge series on statistical and probabilistic mathematics. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Denber, M. (1998). Automatic resolution of anaphora in English. Tech. rep., Eastman
Kodak Co.
Di Eugenio, B., & Glass, M. (2004). The kappa statistic: a second look. Computational
Linguistics, 30 (1), 95101.
Efron, B., & Tibshirani, R. (1993). An Introduction to the Bootstrap. Chapman and Hall,
New York, USA.
Evans, R. (2000). A comparison of rule-based and machine learning methods for identifying
non-nominal it. In Christodoulakis, D. (Ed.), Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Natural Language Processing (NLP00), Vol. 1835 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pp. 233241, Berlin. Springer.
386

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

Evans, R. (2001). Applying machine learning toward an automatic classification of it.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 16 (1), 4557.
Fellbaum, C. (Ed.). (1998). WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass., USA.
Geurts, B., & van der Sandt, R. (2004). Interpreting focus. Theoretical Linguistics, 30 (1),
144.
Green, P. S., & Hecht, K. (1992). Implicit and explicit grammar: An empirical study. Applied
Linguistics, 13 (2), 168184.
Gundel, J., Hedberg, N., & Zacharski, R. (2005). Pronouns without NP antecedents: How
do we know when a pronoun is referential?. In Branco, A., McEnery, T., & Mitkov,
R. (Eds.), Anaphora Processing: Linguistic, Cognitive and Computational Modelling,
pp. 351364. John Benjamins, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Gundel, J. K. (1977). Where do cleft sentences come from?. Language, 53 (3), 543559.
Hamawand, Z. (2003). For-to complement clauses in English: A cognitive grammar analysis.
Studia Linguistica, 57 (3), 171192.
Hearst, M. A. (1992). Automatic acquisition of hyponyms from large text corpora. In
Proceedings of the 14th international conference on Computational Linguistics, pp.
539545.
Hedberg, N. (1990). The Discourse Function of Cleft Sentences in English. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Minnesota.
Hedberg, N. (2000). The referential status of clefts. Language, 76 (4), 891920.
Kaltenbock, G. (2005). It-extraposition in English: A functional view. International Journal
of Corpus Linguistics, 10 (2), 119159.
Kilgarriff, A. (2007). Googleology is bad science. Computational Linguistics, 33 (1), 147151.
Kilgarriff, A., & Grefenstette, G. (2003). Introduction to the special issue on the Web as
corpus. Computational Linguistics, 29 (3), 333347.
Krifka, M. (2003). Bare NPs: Kind-referring, indefinites, both, or neither?. In Proceedings of
Semantics and Linguistic Theory (SALT) XIII, New York, USA. CLC Publications.
Krippendorff, K. (1980). Content Analysis: An Introduction to Methodology. Sage Publications, Inc., Beverly Hills, USA.
Lambrecht, K. (2001). A framework for the analysis of cleft constructions. Linguistics,
39 (3), 463516.
Lappin, S., & Leass, H. J. (1994). An algorithm for pronominal anaphora resolution. Computational Linguistics, 20 (4), 535561.
Marcus, M. P., Marcinkiewicz, M. A., & Santorini, B. (1993). Building a large annotated
corpus of English: the Penn Treebank. Computational Linguistics, 19 (2), 313330.
Markert, K., & Nissim, M. (2005). Comparing knowledge sources for nominal anaphora
resolution. Computational Linguistics, 31 (3), 367402.
387

fiLi, Musilek, Reformat, & Wyard-Scott

Markert, K., Nissim, M., & Modjeska, N. N. (2003). Using the web for nominal anaphora
resolution. In Dale, R., van Deemter, K., & Mitkov, R. (Eds.), Proceedings of the
EACL Workshop on the Computational Treatment of Anaphora, pp. 3946.
Metcalf, A., & Barnhart, D. K. (1999). America in So Many Words: Words That Have
Shaped America. Houghton Mifflin, Boston, USA.
Mitkov, R. (2001). Outstanding issues in anaphora resolution. In Gelbukh, A. (Ed.),
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Computational Linguistics and
Intelligent Text Processing (CICLing01), Vol. 2004 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pp. 110125, Berlin. Springer.
Mitkov, R., Evans, R., & Orasan, C. (2002). A new, fully automatic version of Mitkovs
knowledge-poor pronoun resolution method. In Gelbukh, A. F. (Ed.), Proceedings of
the 3rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text
Processing (CICLing02), Vol. 2276 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 168186,
London, UK. Springer-Verlag.
Muller, C. (2006). Automatic detection of nonreferential it in spoken multi-party dialog.
In Proceedings of the 11th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (EACL06), pp. 4956.
Nanni, D. L. (1980). On the surface syntax of constructions with easy-type adjectives.
Language, 56 (3), 568581.
Ng, V., & Cardie, C. (2002). Identifying anaphoric and non-anaphoric noun phrases to
improve coreference resolution. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference on
Computational linguistics (COLING02), pp. 17, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Noreen, E. W. (1989). Computer-Intensive Methods for Testing Hypotheses : An Introduction. Wiley-Interscience, New York, USA.
Paice, C. D., & Husk, G. D. (1987). Towards the automatic recognition of anaphoric
features in english text: the impersonal pronoun it. Computer Speech & Language,
2 (2), 109132.
Petrov, S., Barrett, L., Thibaux, R., & Klein, D. (2006). Learning accurate, compact, and
interpretable tree annotation. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference
on Computational Linguistics and the 44th annual meeting of the ACL (ACL06), pp.
433440, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Poesio, M., Ishikawa, T., im Walde, S. S., & Vieira, R. (2002). Acquiring lexical knowledge
for anaphora resolution. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, pp. 12201224.
Sinclair, J. (Ed.). (1995). Collins COBUILD English Grammar. Harper Collins, London,
U.K.
Sloat, C. (1969). Proper nouns in English. Language, 45 (1), 2630.
van Rijsbergen, C. J. (1979). Information Retrieval (2nd edition). Butterworth-Heinemann,
Newton, MA, USA.
388

fiIdentification of Pleonastic It Using the Web

Xia, F., & Palmer, M. (2001). Converting dependency structures to phrase structures.
In Proceedings of the first international conference on Human language technology
research (HLT01), pp. 15, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

389

fi