Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 5 (1996) 289-300

Submitted 6/96; published 12/96

Research Note

Characterizations of Decomposable Dependency Models

Luis M. de Campos

Departamento de Ciencias de la Computacion e I.A.
E.T.S. Ingeniera Informatica, Universidad de Granada
18071 - Granada SPAIN

lci@decsai.ugr.es

Abstract

Decomposable dependency models possess a number of interesting and useful properties. This paper presents new characterizations of decomposable models in terms of independence relationships, which are obtained by adding a single axiom to the well-known
set characterizing dependency models that are isomorphic to undirected graphs. We also
briey discuss a potential application of our results to the problem of learning graphical
models from data.

1. Introduction

Graphical models are knowledge representation tools commonly used by an increasing number of researchers, particularly from the Artificial Intelligence and Statistics communities.
The reason for the success of graphical models is their capacity to represent and handle
independence relationships, which have proved crucial for the ecient management and
storage of information (Pearl, 1988).
There are different kinds of graphical models, although we are particularly interested
in undirected and directed graphs (which, in a probabilistic context, are usually called
Markov networks and Bayesian networks, respectively). Each one has its own merits and
shortcomings, but neither of these two representations has more expressive power than the
other: there are independence relationships that can be represented by means of directed
graphs (using the d-separation criterion) and cannot be represented by using undirected ones
(through the separation criterion), and reciprocally. However, there is a class of models that
can be represented by means of both directed and undirected graphs, which is precisely the
class of decomposable models (Haberman, 1974; Pearl, 1988). Decomposable models also
possess important properties, relative to factorization and parameter estimation, which
make them quite useful. So, these models have been studied and characterized in many
different ways (Beeri, Fagin, Maier, & Yannakakis, 1983; Haberman, 1974; Lauritzen, Speed,
& Vijayan, 1984; Pearl, 1988; Wermuth & Lauritzen, 1983; Whittaker, 1991). For example,
decomposable models have been characterized as the kind of dependency models isomorphic
to chordal graphs (Lauritzen et al., 1984; Whittaker, 1991).
However, we do not know any characterization of decomposable models in terms of the
kind of independence relationships that they are capable of representing. This is somewhat
surprising, because it seems quite natural to us to characterize a type of object using the
same terms as those used to define it; in our case, the object is a special type of dependency
model, i.e., a collection of conditional independence statements about a set of variables in
a given domain of knowledge, and therefore we should be able to describe it in terms of
c 1996 AI Access Foundation and Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. All rights reserved.

fiDe Campos

properties of these independence relationships. The objective of this paper is precisely to
obtain such a characterization of decomposable models.
Our approach to the problem will be based on identifying the set of properties or axioms
that a collection of independence relationships must satisfy, in order to be representable
by a chordal graph. This approach has been successfully used to study other kinds of
dependency models: Pearl and Paz (1985) identified the set of properties characterizing
models isomorphic to undirected graphs, and de Campos (1996) determined the axioms
that characterize models isomorphic to undirected and directed singly connected graphs
(i.e., trees and polytrees, respectively).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we briey describe several
concepts which are basic for subsequent development. Section 3 introduces decomposable
models and their representation using chordal graphs. In Section 4 we prove two characterizations of decomposable models. These characterizations turn out to be surprisingly
simple: we only have to add a single property to the set of axioms characterizing dependency
models isomorphic to undirected graphs. Section 5 discusses the relationships between our
results and Lauritzen's characterization of chordal graphs. Finally, Section 6 contains the
concluding remarks and some proposals for future work, which include the application of
the results developed here to the problem of learning graphical models from data.

2. Preliminaries

In this section, we are going to describe the notation as well as some basic concepts and
results used throughout the paper.
A Dependency Model (Pearl, 1988) is a pair M = (U; I ), where U is a finite set of elements or variables, and I (:; :j:) is a rule that assigns truth values to a three place predicate
whose arguments are disjoint subsets of U . Single elements of U will be denoted by standard
or Greek lowercase letters, whereas subsets of U will be represented by capital letters. The
interpretation of the conditional independence assertion I (X; Y jZ ) is that having observed
Z , no additional information about X could be obtained by also observing Y . For example, in a probabilistic model (Dawid, 1979; Lauritzen, Dawid, Larsen, & Leimer, 1990),
I (X; Y jZ ) holds if and only if

P (xjz; y) = P (xjz) whenever P (z; y) > 0;
for every instantiation x, y and z of the sets of variables X , Y and Z . However, dependency
models are applicable to many situations far beyond probabilistic models (de Campos, 1995;
Pearl, 1988; Shenoy, 1992).
A graphical representation of a dependency model M = (U; I ) is a direct correspondence
between the elements in U and the set of nodes in a given graph, G, such that the topology of
G reects some properties of I . The topological property selected to represent independence
assertions depends on the type of graph we use: separation for undirected graphs and dseparation (Pearl, 1988; Verma & Pearl, 1990) for directed acyclic graphs (dags):

 Separation: Given an undirected graph G, two subsets of nodes, X and Y , are said to
be separated by the set of nodes Z , and this is denoted by hX; Y jZ iG , if Z intercepts
all chains between the nodes in X and those in Y .
290

fiCharacterizations of Decomposable Dependency Models

 d-separation: Given a dag G, a chain C (a chain in a directed graph is a sequence of
adjacent nodes, the direction of the arrows does not matter) from node ff to node fi
is said to be blocked by the set of nodes Z , if there is a vertex  2 C such that, either
{  2 Z and arrows of C do not meet head to head at  , or
{  62 Z , nor has  any descendants in Z , and the arrows of C do meet head to
head at  .
Two subsets of nodes, X and Y , are said to be d-separated by Z , and this is also
denoted by hX; Y jZ iG , if all chains between the nodes in X and the nodes in Y
are blocked by Z . There exists a criterion equivalent to d-separation, based on the
separation of X from Y by Z in the moral graph of the smallest ancestral set containing
X [ Y [ Z (Lauritzen et al., 1990).
Given a dependency model, M , we say that an undirected graph (a dag, respectively), G,
is an I-map if every separation (d-separation, respectively) in G implies an independence
in M : hX; Y jZ iG ) I (X; Y jZ ). On the other hand, an undirected graph (a dag, resp.),
G, is called a D-map if every independence relation in the model implies a separation (dseparation resp.) in the graph: I (X; Y jZ ) ) hX; Y jZ iG . A graph, G, is a Perfect map of
M if it is both an I-map and a D-map. M is said to be graph-isomorphic if a graph exists
which is a perfect map of M .

The class of dependency models isomorphic to undirected graphs has been completely
characterized (Pearl & Paz, 1985) in terms of five properties or axioms satisfied by the
independence relationships within the model:
(C1) Symmetry:
(I (X; Y jZ ) ) I (Y; X jZ )) 8X; Y; Z  U:
(C2) Decomposition:
(I (X; Y [ W jZ ) ) I (X; Y jZ )) 8X; Y; W; Z  U:
(C3) Strong Union:
(I (X; Y jZ ) ) I (X; Y jZ [ W )) 8X; Y; W; Z  U:
(C4) Intersection:
(I (X; Y jZ [ W ) and I (X; W jZ [ Y ) ) I (X; Y [ W jZ )) 8X; Y; W; Z  U:
(C5) Transitivity:
(I (X; Y jZ ) ) I (X;  jZ ) or I (; Y jZ ) 8 2 U n (X [ Y [ Z )) 8X; Y; Z  U:
Pearl and Paz also tacitly assumed that an additional, trivial, axiom holds, namely I (X; ;jZ )
8X; Z  U . They also assumed all through that the sets X; Y; Z; W involved in the axioms
are pairwise disjoint.

Theorem 1 (Pearl and Paz, 1985) A dependency model M is isomorphic to an undirected graph if, and only if, it satisfies the axioms C1{C5.

The graph associated with the dependency model M , such that conditional independence
in M is equivalent to separation in this graph, is GM = (U; EM ), where the set of edges
291

fiDe Campos

EM is

EM = fff{fi j ff; fi 2 U; :I (ff; fi jU n fff; fi g)g:

On the other hand, the class of dependency models isomorphic to dags is considerably
more dicult to characterize. It has been suggested (Geiger, 1987; Pearl, 1988) that the
number of axioms required for a complete characterization of the d-separation in dags is
probably unbounded. However, some more restricted models, namely polytree-isomorphic
models, can be fully characterized by using a finite number of axioms (de Campos, 1996).
Graphical models are not only convenient means of expressing conditional independence
statements in a given domain of knowledge, they also convey information necessary for
decisions and inference, in the form of numerical parameters quantifying the strength of each
link. The assignment of numerical parameters to a graphical model is also quite different
for undirected and directed graphs (here we restrict the discussion to probabilistic models).
In the case of directed acyclic graphs, this is a simple matter: we only have to assign to
each variable xi in the dag a conditional probability distribution for every instantiation of
the variables that form the parent set of xi ,  (xi). The product of these local distributions
constitutes a complete and consistent specification, i.e., a joint probability distribution
(which also preserves the independence relationships displayed by the dag):

P (x1 ; x2; : : :; xn) =

Yn P (xij(xi))

i=1

However, the case of undirected graphs is different: constructing a complete and consistent
quantitative specification while preserving the dependence structure of an arbitrary undirected graph can be done using the method of Gibb's potentials (Lauritzen, 1982) (which
assigns compatibility functions to the cliques of the graph), but it is considerably more
complicated, in terms of both computational effort and meaningfulness of the parameters,
than the simple method used for dags.

3. Decomposable Models and Chordal Graphs
Some dependency models representable by means of a special class of undirected graphs
do not present the quantification problem described above. These are the so called decomposable models, which also exhibit a number of important and useful additional properties.
There are several ways of defining decomposable models. The most appropriate to our
interests, which mainly lie in graphical modelling, is based on a graph-theoretic concept:
chordal graphs, also called triangulated graphs (Rose, 1970).

Definition 1 An undirected graph is said to be chordal if every cycle of length four or more
has a chord, i.e., an edge linking two non-adjacent nodes in the cycle.

The simplest example of a non-chordal graph is the diamond-shaped graph displayed in
Figure 1 (a).

Definition 2 A dependency model is decomposable if it is isomorphic to a chordal graph.
292

fiCharacterizations of Decomposable Dependency Models

fi


@
,
,

fi


@
,
,
@
@
,
,
@
@
@fi
@fi fi
fi
fi
,
,

ff
fi
ff






Z
Z
,
,
,
,
Z
Z
Z fi,
Z fi,
Z
Z
fi ,
 ,


(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) The simplest example of a non-chordal graph (b) Non-chordal graph satisfiying
C1{C5 and C7
One important property satisfied by every chordal graph G, which in fact characterizes
chordal graphs (Beeri et al., 1983), is that the edges of G can be directed acyclically so that
every pair of converging arrows emanates from two adjacent nodes. From this property, it
can be deduced (Pearl, 1988) that the class of dependency models that may be represented
by both a dag and an undirected graph is precisely the class of decomposable models (note
that in non-chordal graphs, no matter how we direct the arrows, there will always be a pair
of nonadjacent parents sharing a common child, a configuration that causes separation in
undirected graphs but does not produce d-separation in dags).
Another crucial property of chordal graphs is that their cliques (i.e., the largest subgraphs whose nodes are all adjacent to each other) can be joined to form a tree T , called
the join tree, such that any two cliques containing a node ff are either adjacent in T or
connected by a chain of T made entirely of cliques that contain ff (Beeri et al., 1983) (an
example is depicted in Figure 2).

,
,
,

yl

, Z
Z
,
,
Z

xl

zl

@
%
%
@
@ %

, @
,
@
@
,
w

tl

(a)

ul

vl

l

ffyzt 

 	
ffxy  bbbffuzt 

 	

 A	
,
ffuv,, ffuwAA 

 	 
 	
(b)

Figure 2: Chordal graph (a) and its join tree (b)
This result has important consequences for probabilistic modelling: the joint probability
distribution factorises into the product of marginal distributions on cliques (Lauritzen et al.,
1984; Pearl, 1988; Whittaker, 1991); moreover, maximum likelihood estimates of the model
are directly calculable (Whittaker, 1991). As a consequence the compatibility functions
293

fiDe Campos

used to quantitatively specify the model, have a clear meaning and can be easily estimated.
Additionally, the tree structure of the cliques in a chordal graph facilitates recursive updating of probabilities. In fact, one of the most important algorithms for propagation (i.e.,
updating using local computations) of probabilities in dags, is based on a transformation of
the given dag into a chordal graph, by moralising and next triangulating the dag (Lauritzen
& Spiegelhalter, 1988).

4. Characterizing Decomposable Models

Our purpose is to find a characterization of decomposable models (or equivalently, of chordal
graphs) in terms of properties of independence relationships. This will be carried out by
adding a single property to the set of axioms, C1{C5, characterizing dependency models
isomorphic to undirected graphs.
Let us consider the following axiom:
(C6) Strong Chordality:
(I (ff; fi jZ [  [  ) and I (;  jU nf;  g) ) I (ff; fi jZ [  ) or I (ff; fi jZ [  )) 8ff; fi; ;  2 U 8Z 

U n fff; fi; ;  g:

This axiom establishes a condition that allows us to reduce the size of the conditioning
set separating two variables ff and fi , namely that two of the variables in this set are
conditionally independent. We are going to demonstrate that by adding the axiom of strong
chordality to the axioms found by Pearl and Paz, C1{C5, the associated graph necessarily
becomes a chordal graph and vice versa. Therefore, we shall obtain a characterization of
decomposable models. Pearl (1988) proposed an axiom slightly different from C6, which is
a necessary, though not sucient condition for chordality. He called this axiom chordality:
(C7) Chordality:
(I (ff; fi j [  ) and I (;  jff [ fi ) ) I (ff; fi j ) or I (ff; fi j )) 8ff; fi; ;  2 U:
Observe that in our context, i.e., assuming that C1{C5 hold, C6 implies C7: from
I (ff; fij [ ) and I (; jff [ fi ), as strong union (C3) guarantees that I (;  jU n f;  g) is
implied by I (;  jW ) for any W  U nf;  g (in particular for W = fff; fi g), then by applying
C6 with Z = ;, we obtain I (ff; fi j ) or I (ff; fi j ). However, the set of axioms C1{C5 and
C7 do not constitute a characterization of chordal graphs, as the graph depicted in Figure
1 (b) shows: this graph is not chordal, but it satisfies C1{C5 and C7. By using C6 instead
of C7 we shall obtain the desired result.

Theorem 2 A dependency model M is isomorphic to a chordal graph if, and only if, it
satisfies the axioms C1{C6.

Proof: First, let us prove the sucient condition. Using the Pearl and Paz result, from C1{

C5 we deduce that M is isomorphic to its associated graph G, and therefore independence
in M is equivalent to separation in G. We only have to prove that G is chordal.
Let us suppose that G is not chordal. Then, in G, there is a cycle t1 t2 : : :tn,1 tn t1 , n  4,
without a chord, i.e., 8i; j s.t. 1  i < i + 1 < j  n, the edges ti {tj do not belong to EM
(except the edge t1 {tn ).
294

fiCharacterizations of Decomposable Dependency Models

Let us consider the nodes t1 and tn,1 , and the set of nodes Z = U n ft1 ; : : :; tn g. First,
we are going to prove that the independence statement I (t1; tn,1 jZ [ t2 [ tn ) has to be
true: if it were :I (t1 ; tn,1 jZ [ t2 [ tn ) then we could find a chain linking t1 and tn,1 not
containing nodes from Z [ t2 [ tn , i.e., a chain linking t1 and tn,1 containing only nodes
from ft3 ; : : :; tn,2 g; but in this case we would have an edge linking t1 and some node tj ,
3  j  n , 2, and this contradicts the assumption that the cycle has no chord. Therefore,
we have I (t1; tn,1 jZ [ t2 [ tn ).
On the other hand, the nodes t2 and tn are not connected by any edge (once again
because the cycle has not any chord), so they are separated by U nft2 ; tn g, and therefore we
have I (t2 ; tn jU nft2 ; tn g). Now, using C6, we deduce either I (t1; tn,1 jZ [ t2 ) or I (t1; tn,1 jZ [
tn ). In either case there is a chain linking t1 and tn,1 which is not blocked by the separating
set: in the first case the chain is t1 tn tn,1 , and in the second case it is t1 t2 : : :tn,2 tn,1 .
Therefore, we obtain a contradiction, hence the graph G has to be chordal.
Now, let us prove the necessary condition. Once again using Pearl and Paz's result, as M
is isomorphic to a graph G, then the properties C1{C5 hold.
Let us suppose that C6 does not hold. Then, we can find nodes ff; fi; ;  and a subset
of nodes Z such that I (ff; fi jZ [  [  ), I (;  jU n f;  g), :I (ff; fi jZ [  ) and :I (ff; fi jZ [  ).
From :I (ff; fi jZ [  ) we deduce that a chain fft1 : : :tn fi exists in G, such that ti 62 Z [ 
8i, i.e., ft1 : : :tng \ (Z [  ) = ;. However, from I (ff; fijZ [  [ ) we know that every chain
linking ff and fi must contain some node from Z [  [  . In particular, for the previously
found chain, we have ft1 : : :tn g \ (Z [  [  ) 6= ;. Therefore, there is a node tk such
that tk =  . Let us consider the node tk,1 : from I (ff; fi jZ [  [  ) and transitivity (C5),
we obtain I (ff; tk,1jZ [  [  ) or I (tk,1 ; fi jZ [  [  ). The first independence assertion
cannot be true, because the chain fft1 : : :tk,2 tk,1 does not contain any node from Z [  [  .
Therefore, we have I (tk,1 ; fi jZ [  [  ). If it were I (tk,1 ; fi jZ [  ), then, from transitivity,
we would obtain I (ff; tk,1jZ [  ) or I (ff; fi jZ [  ), and both statements are false, the first
one because of the existence of the chain fft1 : : :tk,2 tk,1 and the second one because of the
hypothesis. So, we have :I (tk,1 ; fi jZ [  ). The same reasoning allows us to assert from
:I (ff; fijZ [ ) that :I (tk,1; fijZ [ ). So, we have found a node tk,1 adjacent to  = tk
satisfying the same properties as ff. A completely analogous reasoning applied to node tk+1
proves I (tk,1 ; tk+1 jZ [  [  ), :I (tk,1 ; tk+1 jZ [  ), and :I (tk,1 ; tk+1 jZ [  ). So, we have
replaced nodes ff and fi by two nodes adjacent to  satisfying the same properties. Note
that the case in which one or the other of tk,1 and tk+1 is ff or fi does not matter to the
subsequent argument.
Now, from :I (tk,1 ; tk+1 jZ [  ) and I (tk,1 ; tk+1 jZ [  [  ) we deduce that there is a
chain tk,1 s1 : : :sm tk+1 in G such that si 62 Z [  8i and for some node sh , sh =  . To
simplify the notation, let us call s0 = tk,1 , sm+1 = tk+1 . We can assume that 8i; j such
that 0 < i + 1 < j  h, there is no edge linking si and sj (if this is not the case, we can
simply replace the subchain si si+1 : : :sj ,1 sj by the single edge si {sj , i.e., we consider the
shortest subchain between tk,1 and sh ). For the same reason, we can also suppose that
8p; q such that h < p + 1 < q  m + 1, there is not any edge linking sp and sq .
We have found a cycle s0 s1 : : :sh,1 sh+1 : : :sm sm+1  in G. Now, let sf and sg be two
nodes satisfying f < h < g , sf and sg are adjacent to  but  is not adjacent to sj for all
j s.t. f < j < g and j 6= h (note that we can always find these two nodes, starting from
f = 0 and g = m + 1). We still have a cycle sf : : :sh,1 sh+1 : : :sg  of length four or more,
295

fiDe Campos

so that, according to the hypothesis, this cycle must have some chord. However, taking
into account how the cycle has been constructed, the only possible chords are the edge  {
or an edge linking a node si , f < i < h, and a node sp , h < p < g . The first possibility
contradicts the hypothesis I (;  jU nf;  g), and the second one implies the existence of the
chain tk,1 s1 : : :sf : : :si sp : : :sg : : :sm tk+1 linking tk,1 and tk+1 , which does not contain any
node from Z [  [  , in contradiction with the statement I (tk,1 ; tk+1 jZ [  [  ). Therefore,
the property C6 has to be true.
We can establish another interesting characterization of chordal graphs, by also adding
only one axiom to those of Pearl and Paz. This new axiom is the following:
(C8) Clique-separability:
(I (ff; fi jU n fff; fi g) ) 9W  U n fff; fi g such that I (ff; fi jW ) and either jW j  1 or
:I (; jU n f; g) 8;  2 W ) 8ff; fi 2 U .
Axiom C8 asserts that whenever two nodes ff and fi are not adjacent (are independent),
we can find a separating set whose nodes are all adjacent to each other, i.e., a complete
separating set.

Theorem 3 A dependency model M is isomorphic to a chordal graph if, and only if, it
satisfies the axioms C1{C5 and C8.

Proof: Let us prove the necessary condition. As the graph G associated to M is chordal,

from Theorem 2 we know that the properties C1{C5 and C6 hold.
Let us suppose that C8 does not hold. Then, there are ff and fi , such that I (ff; fi jU n
fff; fig) but for all W  U n fff; fig it is either :I (ff; fijW ), or jW j > 1 and 9;  2 W such
that I (;  jU n f;  g).
Let W0 be any separating set of minimal size for ff and fi , i.e., I (ff; fi jW0) and :I (ff; fi jS )
8S  W0 (we know that at least one separating set of this type has to exist, because
I (ff; fijU n fff; fig) holds). Then, we can deduce that jW0j > 1 and 9;  2 W0 such that
I (; jU n f;  g). Let us define Z = W0 n f;  g. Thus, we have I (ff; fi jZ [  [ ) and
I (; jU n f;  g) and, by applying C6, we obtain either I (ff; fi jZ [  ) or I (ff; fi jZ [ ), i.e.,
I (ff; fijW0 n fg) or I (ff; fijW0 n f g), which contradicts the minimality of W0 . Therefore,
C8 has to be true.
To prove the sucient condition, let us suppose that G is not chordal. Then, there is a
cycle t1 t2 : : :tn,1 tn t1 , n  4, without a chord. So, the nodes t1 and tn,1 are not adjacent,
hence they are separated, and let W be any separating set of t1 and tn,1 , i.e., satisfying
I (t1; tn,1 jW ). Then tn 2 W and ft2; : : :; tn,2 g \ W 6= ;, otherwise we could find a chain
linking t1 and tn,1 which would not be blocked by W , thus contradicting I (t1 ; tn,1 jW ).
So, every separating set W contains tn and some ti ; 2  i  n , 2, hence jW j > 1. Now, by
applying C8, we deduce that :I (tn ; tijU n ftn ; ti g), i.e., tn and ti are adjacent nodes, which
contradicts the assumption that the cycle had no chord. Then, the conclusion is that the
graph has to be chordal.
296

fiCharacterizations of Decomposable Dependency Models

5. Relationships with other Characterizations of Decomposable Models
There is a characterization of decomposable models1 (Lauritzen, 1989) which is quite related
to ours: an undirected graph is chordal if, and only if, every subset of nodes that separates
any two nodes ff and fi and is minimal is complete.
In order to rewrite this result using our notation, let us consider the following axiom:
(C9) Completeness:
(I (ff; fi jZ ) and :I (ff; fi jS ) 8S  Z ) jZ j  1 or :I (;  jU n f;  g) 8;  2 Z ) 8ff; fi 2
U 8Z  U n fff; fig.
Axiom C9 says exactly that any minimal separator of ff and fi has to be complete. An
equivalent formulation of this axiom reads: any separator of ff and fi which is not complete
cannot be minimal. In symbols:
(C9') Completeness:
(I (ff; fi jZ [  [  ) and I (;  jU nf;  g) ) 9W  Z [  [  such that I (ff; fi jW )) 8ff; fi; ;  2

U 8Z  U n fff; fi; ; g:

Then, Lauritzen's result can be reformulated as follows: A dependency model M is
isomorphic to a chordal graph if, and only if, it satisfies the axioms C1{C5 and either C9
or C9'.
Note the similarity between C9 and C8 and between C9' and C6. Taking into account
Theorems 2 and 3, we can deduce that all these axioms, C6, C8, C9 and C9', are equivalent
among each other (assuming that C1{C5 hold). However, this equivalence is not evident, in
spite of the similarities among axioms: it is clear that C6 implies C9' and C9 implies C8, but
the opposite implications are not obvious. In fact, strong chordality and clique-separability
seem stronger and weaker, respectively, than completeness. This becomes clearer if we
express the axioms in the following way: Assuming that two nodes ff and fi can be separated:

 Completeness (C9 or C9'): If a separator of ff and fi is minimal, then it is complete;
or, equivalently, if a separator of ff and fi is not complete, then it has a proper subset
which is still a separator of ff and fi .
 Clique-separability (C8): There exists a separator of ff and fi which is complete.
 Strong chordality (C6): If a separator of ff and fi is not complete, then it has a proper
subset which is still a separator of ff and fi ; moreover, we can find this subset by
removing, from the initial separator, one of the nodes causing its incompleteness.

Observe that both C6 and C9' share the same antecedent, but the consequent of C9' only
says that there exists a separator, whereas the consequent of C6 gives more information
about the identity of this separator. Note also that both C8 and C9 assert the existence of
a complete separator, but C9 requires a previous condition (minimality) and C8 does not.
1. The existence of this result was pointed out to me by a reviewer.

297

fiDe Campos

6. Concluding Remarks
We have found two new characterizations of the class of decomposable dependency models,
in terms of properties of independence relationships. We believe that these results are
theoretically interesting, because they provide a new perspective of this important and well
studied class of graphical models. Moreover, our results are quite concise, since only one
property has to be added to the set of properties characterizing independence relationships
in undirected graphs. They could also be useful for proving results about models of this
sort.
From a more practical point of view, the axiomatic characterizations create desiderata
that could drive automated construction of chordal graphs from data. As we have already
commented, practical use of graphical models and, particularly, of bayesian networks, requires that the dag representing the model be transformed into a chordal graph. From the
perspective of learning models from data, it may be interesting to estimate directly the
chordal graph from the available data, instead of first learning the dag and after converting it into a chordal graph. We believe that the basic independence properties of chordal
graphs identified by our theoretical study, C6 and C8, could guide us in the design of efficient algorithms for learning chordal graphs. It is known that the problem of learning
bayesian networks from data is computationally very complex. For example, some algorithms (Spirtes, Glymour, & Scheines, 1993) start from a complete undirected graph, and
then try to remove edges by testing for conditional independence between the linked nodes,
but using conditioning sets as small as possible (thus reducing the complexity and increasing
reliability). In this context, if we rewrite the property C6 in the following way:

:I (ff; fijZ [  ) and :I (ff; fijZ [ ) and I (ff; fijZ [  [ ) ) :I (; jU n f; g);
then we could use it as a rule that simultaneously allows us to remove the edge ff{fi from
the current graph, and to fix the edge  { as a true edge in the graph.
Similarly, the property C8 could give rise to the following rule: if we are trying to remove
an edge ff{fi from the current graph, by testing conditional independence statements like
I (ff; fijW ), then discard as candidate separating sets those sets W whose nodes are not all
adjacent to each other.
This topic of designing ecient algorithms for learning chordal graphs will be the object
of future research.

Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the Spanish Comision Interministerial de Ciencia y Tecnologa (CICYT) under Project n. TIC96-0781. I would like to thank Milan Studeny and
three anonymous reviewers for helpful comments and suggestions. I am particularly grateful to the reviewer who pointed out to me the existence of Lauritzen's characterization of
chordal graphs.
298

fiCharacterizations of Decomposable Dependency Models

References

Beeri, C., Fagin, R., Maier, D., & Yannakakis, M. (1983). On the desirability of acyclic
database schemes. JACM, 30, 479{513.
Dawid, A. P. (1979). Conditional independence in statistical theory. J.R. Statist. Soc. Ser.
B, 41, 1{31.
de Campos, L. M. (1995). Independence relationships in possibility theory and their application to learning belief networks. In Della Riccia, G., Kruse, R., & Viertl, R.
(Eds.), Mathematical and Statistical Methods in Artificial Intelligence, CISM Courses
and Lectures 363, pp. 119{130. Wien: Springer Verlag.
de Campos, L. M. (1996). Independency relationships and learning algorithms for singly
connected networks. Tech. rep. DECSAI 960204, University of Granada.
Geiger, D. (1987). The non-axiomatizability of dependencies in directed acyclic graphs.
Tech. rep. R-83, Cognitive Systems Laboratory, UCLA.
Haberman, S. J. (1974). The Analysis of Frequency Data. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Lauritzen, S. L. (1982). Lectures on Contingency Tables (2nd ed.). Aalborg: University of
Aalborg Press.
Lauritzen, S. L. (1989). Mixed graphical association models. Scand. J. Statist., 16, 273{306.
Lauritzen, S. L., Dawid, A. P., Larsen, B. N., & Leimer, H. G. (1990). Independence
properties of directed markov fields. Networks, 20, 491{505.
Lauritzen, S. L., Speed, T. P., & Vijayan, K. (1984). Decomposable graphs and hypergraphs.
J. Autral. Math. Soc. A, 36, 12{29.
Lauritzen, S. L., & Spiegelhalter, D. J. (1988). Local computations with probabilities on
graphical structures and their application to expert systems. J.R. Statist. Soc. Ser.
B, 50, 157{224.
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible
Inference. San Mateo: Morgan and Kaufmann.
Pearl, J., & Paz, A. (1985). Graphoids: A graph-based logic for reasoning about relevance
relations. Tech. rep. 850038 (R-53-L), Cognitive Systems Laboratory, UCLA.
Rose, D. J. (1970). Triangulated graphs and the elimination process. Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 32, 597{609.
Shenoy, P. P. (1992). Conditional independence in uncertainty theories. In Dubois, D.,
Wellman, M. P., D'Ambrosio, B., & Smets, P. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 284{291. San Mateo: Morgan
and Kaufmann.
299

fiDe Campos

Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., & Scheines, R. (1993). Causation, Prediction and Search. Lecture
Notes in Statistics 81. New York: Springer Verlag.
Verma, T., & Pearl, J. (1990). Causal networks: Semantics and expressiveness. In Shachter,
R. D., Levitt, T. S., Kanal, L. N., & Lemmer, J. (Eds.), Uncertainty in Artificial
Intelligence, 4, pp. 69{76. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Wermuth, N., & Lauritzen, S. L. (1983). Graphical and recursive models for contingency
tables. Biometrika, 70, 537{552.
Whittaker, J. (1991). Graphical Models in Applied Multivariate Statistics. Chichester:
Wiley.

300

fi