Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 8 (1998) 93{128

Submitted 5/97; published 3/98

Synthesizing Customized Planners from Specifications
Biplav Srivastava
Subbarao Kambhampati

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287.

biplav@asu.edu
rao@asu.edu

Abstract

Existing plan synthesis approaches in artificial intelligence fall into two categories {
domain independent and domain dependent. The domain independent approaches are applicable across a variety of domains, but may not be very ecient in any one given domain.
The domain dependent approaches need to be (re)designed for each domain separately, but
can be very ecient in the domain for which they are designed. One enticing alternative
to these approaches is to automatically synthesize domain independent planners given the
knowledge about the domain and the theory of planning. In this paper, we investigate
the feasibility of using existing automated software synthesis tools to support such synthesis. Specifically, we describe an architecture called CLAY in which the Kestrel Interactive
Development System (KIDS) is used to derive a domain-customized planner through a
semi-automatic combination of a declarative theory of planning, and the declarative control knowledge specific to a given domain, to semi-automatically combine them to derive
domain-customized planners. We discuss what it means to write a declarative theory of
planning and control knowledge for KIDS, and illustrate our approach by generating a class
of domain-specific planners using state space refinements. Our experiments show that the
synthesized planners can outperform classical refinement planners (implemented as instantiations of UCP, Kambhampati & Srivastava, 1995), using the same control knowledge. We
will contrast the costs and benefits of the synthesis approach with conventional methods
for customizing domain independent planners.

1. Introduction

Given the current state of the world, a set of desired goals, and a set of action templates,
\planning" involves synthesizing a sequence of actions which when executed from the initial
state will lead to a state of the world that satisfies all the goals (Fikes & Nilsson, 1990;
McAllester & Rosenblitt, 1991; Kambhampati, 1997b). Planning is known to be a combinatorially hard problem, and a variety of approaches for plan synthesis have been developed
over the past twenty years. These approaches can be classified into two broad categories
{ domain independent and domain dependent. Domain independent planners do not make
any assumptions about the planning domains, and can thus accept and solve planning problems from any domain. In contrast, domain specific planners are specifically designed for a
single domain and thus have the dynamics and control knowledge of the domain hard-coded.
The advantage of domain independent planning is that once a planning algorithm is
designed, it can be used in any domain by simply changing the action template that is
input to the algorithm. In contrast, domain-specific planners would have to be \modified"
or \re-designed" for each domain. On the ip-side, domain-specific planners tend to be more

c 1998 AI Access Foundation and Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. All rights reserved.

fiSrivastava & Kambhampati

Theory of refinement

Domain Knowledge

planning
Control Knowledge
(eg. Planes dont touchdown
without delivering packages)

- FSS
- BSS
KIDS

- PSS
- HTN
Dynamical Model
(Action/operator description)

Problem

Customized
Planner

Plan

Figure 1: Architectural overview of planner synthesis with KIDS in the CLAY approach.
The theories of refinement planning and domain knowledge are declaratively specified to KIDS which in turn combines them to produce a customized planner for
the domain. The resulting planner, like conventional planners, can handle any
planning problem from the domain. For a detailed description, see Section 3.
ecient in their designated domains than domain independent planners since the latter may
not be able to effectively exploit the control knowledge of every domain.
Not surprisingly, a significant amount of work in AI planning has been aimed at improving the performance of domain independent planners by dynamically customizing them to
a given domain. This customization is done by providing the domain writer the ability to
control the search of the planner, as is the case in task-reduction planning (Kambhampati
& Srivastava, 1996; Kambhamapti, 1995), or by using learning techniques (Kambhampati,
Katukam, & Qu, 1996; Minton, 1990). Although several approaches have been developed
for learning to improve planning performance, at present they are not an effective match
for the eciency of domain dependent planners.
One intriguing alternative is to automatically synthesize domain dependent planners
given the knowledge about the domain and the theory of planning. In this paper, we investigate the feasibility of using existing automated software synthesis tools to support such
a synthesis. We introduce the CLAY architecture which supports the synthesis of domain
dependent planners using KIDS, a semi-automated software synthesis system. Specifically,
as shown in Figure 1, a declarative theory of plan synthesis (theory of planning) is combined
with the control knowledge specific to a given domain in a semi-automated software synthesis system called Kestrel Interactive Development System { KIDS (Smith, 1990, 1992a,
94

fiSynthesizing Customized Planners from Specifications

1992b) to derive a customized planner for the domain. We will draw the declarative theory
of plan synthesis from domain independent planning techniques. Domain specific control
knowledge will be expressed in terms of the types of plans that are preferred in the given
domain.
Such an approach strikes a promising middle-ground between domain independent and
domain dependent planners. The theories of planning are encoded independent of domains,
and the domain control knowledge can be encoded independent of the specific planning
theory being used. The customization step compiles the domain control knowledge into the
planning algorithm and ensures that the resulting planners are able to exploit the structure
of the domain.

1.1 Overview of the Synthesis Approach

As briey mentioned above, the practicality of our approach is predicated on the availability
of a software synthesis system capable of deriving code from formal specifications. KIDS is
a powerful semi-automated system for development of correct and ecient programs from
formal specifications. Given a domain theory and the input/output specification of a task,
KIDS system helps in synthesizing a program capable of solving the task. Here, the term
theory refers to any useful body of knowledge. Task refers to any assignment that is given
to KIDS for solving and the solution is a program for that task. The input to KIDS is a task
theory comprised of the task specification and a declarative description of useful concepts
and rules to reason in the task space. In this research, we give planning as a task to KIDS
and expect it to synthesize and return a planner as the solution. The planner can then take
planning problems as input and return results (plans).
In order to support planner synthesis, we have to develop and input a theory of planning
to KIDS. As discussed in (Kambhampati, 1997b), the traditional plan synthesis techniques
can be described in terms of a common plan representation, with different planners corresponding to different ways of refining the partial plans such as progression, regression and
plan-space refinements (see Section 2.2). Consequently, our planning theory will consist of
a specification of the planning task (in terms of input and output data types) and one or
more refinement theories. Since we are also interested in domain-customized planners, we
have to provide the necessary domain knowledge to KIDS.
Given these inputs, KIDS semi-automatically synthesizes a program (in this case, a domain dependent refinement planner) using generic algorithm design tactics (such as branch
and bound, global search). The resulting planner, like conventional planners, can handle
any planning problem from the domain. See Section 3 for more details.

1.2 Outcomes

To understand the ecacy of plan synthesis in CLAY, in this paper, we concentrate on the
synthesis of planners using state-space refinement theories.1 Empirical evaluation shows
that these synthesized planners can be very ecient. For example, in the blocks world
domain where the goal was stack inversion, a KIDS synthesized planner solved a 14 blocks
problem in under a minute. In the logistics domain, a problem with 12 packages, 4 planes
1. In future, we plan to extend our approach to plan-space and task-reduction refinements.

95

fiSrivastava & Kambhampati

and 8 places was solved in under a minute. Similarly, in the Tyre domain (Russell & Norvig,
1995), the \fixit" problem was solved in under a minute. To put these performance results
in perspective, we compared KIDS' synthesized planners to a set of classical planners implemented as the instantiations the UCP planning system (Kambhampati & Srivastava,
1995). As described later, instantiations of UCP can emulate a spectrum of classical planners, including the popular SNLP planner (McAllester & Rosenblitt, 1991), by selecting
the appropriate refinement. In our experiments, the best of the KIDS' synthesized planners
outperformed the best of the UCP instantiations when given the same domain-specific information. We hypothesize that this is because KIDS can profitably fold-in the domain-specific
control knowledge (i.e., the domain theory) into the planning code.

1.3 Organization

The rest of this paper describes the details of our approach, called the CLAY architecture
for planner synthesis. The paper is organized as follows: after a brief review of traditional
plan synthesis approaches and software synthesis on KIDS in Section 2, we walk through
the CLAY framework in Section 3. Section 4 presents a discussion on the nature of planners
synthesized by our approach. Section 5 empirically evaluates the synthesized planners and
compares them to classical planners. Section 6 discusses related work. Section 7 describes
our conclusions and discusses the costs and benefits of the synthesis approach.

2. Background

In this section, we briey discuss relevant background on software synthesis with KIDS,
and plan generation that will be needed to follow the rest of the paper.

2.1 Kestrel Interactive Development System

Before discussing KIDS, we start with some preliminaries on automated software synthesis.
The holy grail of software synthesis is to :
 Produce highly reliable, adaptable software in a greatly reduced development time.
 Automate detail intensive tasks in software production that are largely non-creative
in nature.
A program, or program segment, P , is correct with respect to an initial condition (assertion) I and a final condition (assertion) F if and only if whenever I is true prior to the execution of P , and P terminates, F will be true after the execution of P is complete. Using a
formal specification of the task, a knowledge-base and an inference system, knowledge-based
software synthesis proceeds with an iterative specification refinement process to specialize
the general knowledge of program development (in the form of algorithm theories) to solve
specific tasks on hand. The refinements are sound in that if the specification is correct, the
synthesized program (code) will be correct.
KIDS is a program-transformation framework for the development of programs from
formal specifications of a task. KIDS runs on Sun workstations and is built over REFINE,
a commercial knowledge-based programming environment and a high-level language. The
96

fiSynthesizing Customized Planners from Specifications

Software Specification
(Input, output specification of a planner)

Background Knowledge
(Domain Dynamics, Control

Algorithm Design Tactics

knowledge, distributive laws etc.)

(Global search/Refinement search
for planning)

Un-optimized algorithm
(A planning algorithm)

Optimization
(Simplification, finite differencing etc)

Optimized Algorithm
(optimized planner)

Compilation

Compiled Code in base language

Figure 2: Overview of software synthesis process in KIDS
REFINE language supports first-order logic, set-theory, pattern matching and transformation rules. Refine provides a compiler that generates Common Lisp or C code for programs
written in its logical specification language.
In the following, we describe the general steps involved in synthesizing software on KIDS.
Figure 2 provides an overview of this process. The process is illustrated in more detail in
Section 3 in the context of synthesis of customized planner code.
1. Develop a task theory to state and reason about the task. The user defines appropriate
functions and types that describe the task and also gives laws that allow high-level
reasoning about the defined functions. For planning, many planning theories (e.g.,
progression and regression) were written and relevant laws were specified. We also provided domain theories so that KIDS could perform specialized reasoning on planners
it returned as solutions.
2. Select and apply a design tactic to select an algorithmic framework that should be
used to implement the task specification. KIDS currently supports a variety of design tactics including problem reduction, divide and conquer, global search and local
search. For planning, we use the global search design tactic because our formalization
97

fiSrivastava & Kambhampati

of classical planning is driven by refinement search which can be seen as a special case
of global search (see below).
3. Apply optimizations to make the generated algorithm ecient. At first, the generated
algorithm is well-structured and correct in that it can return all valid solutions, but
it can be very inecient. The algorithm is optimized through specification reduction
techniques such as simplification, partial evaluation and finite-differencing.
4. Compile the algorithm to produce a program in the base language.
The domain theories and specifications are written in REFINE, and KIDS synthesizes
and optimizes the algorithms in the same language. To transform specifications into programs as well as to optimize the programs, KIDS uses a form of deductive reasoning called
\directed inference" to reason about the task specification and domain theory.
The KIDS system has been used to derive a variety of programs in the past. Of particular
interest to us is the work on deriving ecient scheduling software (Smith & Parra, 1993;
Burstein & Smith, 1996), as the success of these programs provided initial impetus for our
own research.

2.2 Theories of Plan Synthesis

As mentioned earlier, using KIDS to derive planning software in CLAY involves figuring
out (a) how declarative theories for different types of classical planning are specified and
(b) what algorithmic design templates are best suited to planner synthesis. (Kambhampati,
1997b) provides an overview of traditional plan synthesis approaches. As discussed there,
plan synthesis approaches come in many varieties with very little superficial commonality
between them. In the last few years, we have developed a unifying framework that subsumes
most of these approaches (Kambhampati & Srivastava, 1995; Kambhampati, Knoblock, &
Yang, 1995; Kambhampati, 1997b). In this framework, plan synthesis is modeled as a
process of searching in a space of sets of action sequences. These sets are represented
compactly as collections of constraints called \partial plans." The search process first
attempts to extract a result (an action sequence capable of solving the problem) from the
partial plan, and when that fails, \refines" (or splits) the partial plan into a set of new partial
plans (each corresponding to sets of action sequences that are subsets of the action sequence
set corresponding to the original partial plan), and considers the new plans in turn. The
existing domain independent plan-synthesis algorithms correspond to four different ways of
refining partial plans. These are known, respectively, as Forward State Space or progression
refinement (FSS), Backward State Space Refinement or regression refinement (BSS), Plan
Space Refinement (PSS) and Task-Reduction Refinement. STRIPS (Fikes & Nilsson, 1990)
is an example of a planner using the FSS refinement, TOPI (Barrett & Weld, 1994) uses
the BSS refinement, SNLP (McAllester & Rosenblitt, 1991) uses the plan-space refinement
and NONLIN (Tate, 1977) uses the task-reduction refinement. Given this background, the
declarative theory of plan generation in CLAY corresponds to theories of the refinements.
The algorithm tactic underlying plan generation corresponds to \refinement search." The
KIDS system supports an algorithm tactic called \global search" (Smith, 1992a) which can
be seen as a generalization of this refinement search.
98

fiSynthesizing Customized Planners from Specifications

SPECIFICATION: What is a planning problem ?
Encoding of
Domain Knowledge
Theory Import
Direction

Planner

Level 1

REFINEMENT THEORY: What refinements are available ?
Progression(FSS)

Regression(BSS)

Plan space (PS)

Level 2

DOMAIN THEORY: How is the particular planning domain unique ?

Blocks World
Domain
Knowlegde

Blocks World
Progression

Logistics Domain
Knowlegde

Level 3

Blocks World
Regression
Logistics Progression

Logistics
Regression

Figure 3: The CLAY architecture for writing planning theory. Each level answers a question
relevant to that level of planning detail. CLAY uses KIDS' feature of theory
import to modularize the domain-specific planning theory

3. Developing a Planner from Declarative Specification: The CLAY
Architecture

Figure 1 summarizes how KIDS is used to synthesize a domain-specific refinement planner. The domain knowledge consists of a dynamical model and control knowledge. The
dynamical model is specified in the form of actions (also called operators) that define legal transformations from one state of the world to another. Control knowledge is a set of
domain-specific criteria that helps the planner decide if a plan P1 is better than P2 and is
intended to make search more ecient. An example of control knowledge is that in a logistics domain where some packages have to be moved to their destinations using airplanes,
planes should not touchdown at a location if they have no packages to pickup or deliver.
Refinement planning and domain control knowledge are brought together in the CLAY
architecture for writing declarative domain-specific planning theory as summarized in Figure 3. To specify a planning task, a plan representation is selected and the constraints
that should be satisfied by a solution plan are enumerated in the planner specification.
The planner specification is dependent on the plan representation but is independent of
the refinement needed for search. A refinement strategy uses the planner specification and
defines how children nodes are generated from a given partial plan, what the goal test will
be, and also explicates any refinement specific search pruning tests. The refinement and the
99

fiSrivastava & Kambhampati

specification together form the planning theory. To obtain a domain dependent planner, all
one needs to do is import any planning theory and provide some relevant domain-specific
planning control knowledge that provides a preference structure among partial plans and
competing solutions. An interesting special case is when one specifies a generic domain
knowledge to the effect that all the plans are equally good in the domain. In such a case,
based on the refinement used, one gets a FSS, BSS, PSS or hybrid (if multiple refinements
are used), general-purpose planner.
Each level in the directed tree in Figure 3 represents an abstraction of the planning
task. At the root of the tree (Level 1), only a description of a planning task is required
without specifying what refinements strategies should be used. At Level 2, the refinements
are specified but no assumption is made about the domain. Next, characteristics of the
domain are provided at Level 3. A progression (FSS) blocks world planner is different from
a progression logistics domain planner only in terms of the domain knowledge. On the other
hand, a progression blocks world planner is different from a regression (BSS) blocks-world
planner only in terms of the refinement used.
As stated above, to ensure exibility, the control knowledge should not change when
different refinements are used and thereby represent substantial exibility. But in practice,
since control knowledge helps prune children nodes produced by a refinement, pruning may
be more effective if the control knowledge is encoded depending on the refinement. There
can also be a middle ground that we have not implemented: domain control knowledge
may be represented in an intermediate form depending on the partial plan representation.
Each refinement can provide, in addition to a termination test, a conversion function to
transform the control knowledge into the refinement specific form.

3.1 Representing Domain Operators

We now discuss how the world state is represented and how the domain operators define
state transformations. In classical planning, the world is modeled in terms of a set of \state
variables." Each state of the world corresponds to a particular assignments of values to these
variables. The actions are described in terms of the specific variable-value combinations that
are needed for them to be applicable, and the variable-value combinations they will enforce
after execution. Two variants of this general modeling approach have become popular in the
planning community. The first, called the STRIPS representation (Fikes & Nilsson, 1990)
represents the world in terms of ground atoms in a first order logic. The action applicability
conditions and effects are also described in terms of conjunctions of ground atoms. The
second variant (Backstrom & Nebel, 1993) models the world and actions directly in terms
of multi-valued state variables and their values. Since STRIPS representation can be seen
as a state-variable model with boolean state-variables, and since any multi-valued statevariable system can be converted into an equivalent boolean state-variable system, the two
representations are equivalent in expressive power.
We chose the state-variable representation for our implementation since this can be
directly mapped on to the primitive data structures supported by KIDS. Figure 4 shows
the action of moving block A from block B to the top of block C in STRIPS and statevariable representation. A blocks world domain is an environment in which some blocks
are placed on a table or on top of other blocks and the problems involve stacking them in
100

fiSynthesizing Customized Planners from Specifications

STRIPS representation

Action: move(A; B; C )
Prec: clear(A) ^ clear(C ) ^ ^on(A; B )
Post: on(A; C ) ^ clear(B ) ^ :clear(C )
^:on(A; B )

Muti-valued state-variable representation

Action: move(A; B; C )
Pre: hB; True; 0; False; 0; Truei
Post: hC; True; 0; True; 0; Falsei

(Where a state is a 6-tuple
h pos-A, clr-A, pos-B, clr-B, pos-C, clr-C i,
and the zeroes represent \don't care" values)

Figure 4: Different representations of \Move A from B to C"
some desired configuration. For the purpose of exposition, we are showing values of state
variables corresponding to block positions (e.g., pos-A) by symbols 'B', 'C', etc. and clear
conditions (e.g., clr-A) by True or False. In practice, we map all the valid values of state
variables to integers.

3.2 Specification of a Planner

KIDS uses a functional specification and programming language augmented with set-theoretic
data types. A specification of the task (Smith, 1992a) is represented by a quadruple
F = hD; R; I; Oi where D is the input type satisfying the input condition, I : D ! boolean.
The output type is R and the output condition, O : D  R ! boolean, defines a feasible solution. If O(x,z) holds, then z is a feasible solution with respect to input x. The specification
of a program follows the template:
function F (x :D) : set(R)
where I(x)
returns f z j O (x,z) g
= Body(x)
A specification for program F is consistent if for all possible inputs satisfying the input
condition, the body produces a feasible solution, i.e., 8(x : D)9(z : R)(I (x) =) O(x; z )).
Within this view, a planner takes as inputs an initial state, a goal state and an operator
list. The operators are assumed to define state transitions from valid states to valid states.
A specification for the planning task is: given the initial state, the goal state and the
operator list, return a sequence of operators (plan) such that:



termination-test: The goals must hold in the final state resulting from the execu-

tion of the plan. (We are only considering planning problems in which the goal is to
make all state-variables achieve specified values, i.e., goals of achievement).
 domain-independent-pruning-test: The plan passes the domain independent
pruning tests. Each planning refinemen can specify conditions under which a partialplan cannot lead to a desirable solution; and any partial plan satisfying such a pruning
101

fiSrivastava & Kambhampati

function PLANNER
(INIT: seq(integer), GOAL: seq(integer),
OPERS: seq(tuple(seq(integer), seq(integer))))
returns
(PLAN: seq(integer)
| range(PLAN) subset {1 .. size(OPERS)}
& GOODNESS-TEST(VISITED-STATES
(PLAN, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
& NO-MOVES-BACK(VISITED-STATES
(PLAN, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
& GOAL-TEST(VISITED-STATES
(PLAN, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL))

Figure 5: A declarative specification for planning
test can be eliminated from further consideration. For example, the state-loop pruning heuristic in forward state-space refinement says that if we have a partial plan such
that the plan-state after executing operator O2 is a subset of the state following an
earlier operator O1 , then such a partial-plan can be pruned.
 domain-dependent-pruning-test: The plan passes the additional domain-specific
pruning tests.
The last one is the hook through which domain specific control knowledge is introduced.
In the current implementation of CLAY, we use domain knowledge for rejecting undesirable
partial plans. In Section 7.1, we discuss ways in which our implementation can be extended
to support other uses of domain control knowledge.
The specification of the planning task above is declarative in that it states what constraints must be satisfied in the resulting plan produced by a planner when given a planning
problem. It does not suggest any algorithm that should be used to obtain the results. Algorithmic decisions will be made in the program development phase of KIDS.
An example of top-level specification of planning task (in REFINE) is shown in Figure 5.
In this specification, the input condition, I , is true, the input data type, D includes INIT,
GOAL and OPERS, the output data type R is PLAN and the output condition O consists of
goodness-test, goal-test, no-moves-back. no-moves-back is a domain independent
pruning tests whereas goodness-test is a domain dependent pruning test.
Delving deeper into representation detail, we represent a plan as a sequence of indices
in the operator list (i.e., sequence of operator identifiers). For state-space planning, the
state sequence corresponding to the partial-plan is produced by function visited-states
and the goal test, domain independent pruning tests and domain dependent pruning tests
are done on the state-sequence by functions goal-test, no-moves-back and goodnesstest respectively. The state-variables take integer values. Consequently, our initial and
goal states are a sequence of integers.
In words, the specification in Figure 5 says that a partial plan is a sequence of integral
indices (of operators) and so the indices must not be more than the size of operator list. Valid
102

fiSynthesizing Customized Planners from Specifications

plan is one whose corresponding state sequence (produced by visited-states) satisfies the
goal-test, no-moves-back and goodness-test2.
In the context of forward-state space refinement (FSS), visited-states returns the
states obtained by the successive application of the operators in the partial plan to the
initial state and the resulting states thereafter. goal-test signals that the goal has been
achieved; for FSS refinement it involves checking that the last state in the state-sequence
is the goal state. The no-moves-back function tests state looping; forward state-space
looping checks if the state after executing operator Oj (STATE Sj ) is a subset of the state
following an earlier operator Oi (i < j ) (STATE Si ), this partial-plan can be pruned3.
The function goodness-test checks for possible redundancy in the state sequence
corresponding to the current partial plan based on domain characteristics. Let us explain
it in the context of the blocks world domain. We can specify any reasonable checks for the
blocks world as long as they do not make the planner lose a desired solution. Below, we
present two goodness-tests:

 (Heuristic H1: Limit useless moves) If a block moves between states i and (i+1), it

must not change position between states (i+1) and (i+2). The motivation behind this
check is to prevent blocks from being moved around randomly in successive moves.
 (Heuristic H2: Move via table) A block can only move from its initial state to the
table and from table only to its goal position. This is motivated by the fact that
a polynomial time approximate algorithm for solving blocks world planning problems involves putting all blocks on table first, and then constructing each of the goal
configuration stacks bottom-up.4

3.3 Implementing the Specification using Global Search

As discussed in Section 2, we need to select an algorithm design tactic to implement the task
specification in KIDS. One of the design tactics provided by KIDS is global search. The basic
idea of global search is to represent and manipulate sets of candidate solutions. The principal
operations are to extract candidate solutions from a set and to split a set into subsets.
Derived operations include various filters which are used to eliminate sets containing no
feasible or optimal solutions. Global search algorithms work as follows: starting from an
initial set of potential solutions, that contains all desired solutions to the given problem
instance, the algorithm repeatedly extracts solutions, splits sets and eliminates sets via
filters until a candidate solution can be drawn from one of the sets. Sets of solutions are
represented implicitly by data structures called descriptors, and splitting is done by adding
2. REFINE code of all the referenced functions is shown in Appendix A.
3. Actually, we test a slightly more general condition that if the state after executing operator Oj (STATE
Sj ) is weaker than a state following an earlier operator Oi (STATE Si ), then this partial-plan can be
pruned. Sj is weaker than Si if every state-variable with assigned value in state Si has that same assigned
value in state Sj . By specifying weakness rather than subset as the relationship between states to decide
domain independent pruning in state space planning, we allow the synthesized planner to deal with a
partially specified initial state. The planner will work correctly as long as all the state-variables that are
required for reasoning are specified in the initial state.
4. Our pruning test alone doesn't guarantee polynomial algorithm since the order in which the blocks are
to be put on the table or later at the goal positions is not specified in the pruning heuristic.

103

fiSrivastava & Kambhampati

mutually exclusive and exhaustive sets of constraints to the descriptors. The process can
be described as a tree search in which a node represents a set of candidates and an arc
represents the split relationship between a set and its subset. For complete details, readers
are referred to (Smith, 1992a).
The KIDS' global search paradigm is a general form of the refinement search model
used to unify classical planners in UCP (Kambhampati & Srivastava, 1995). Specifically,
the partial plans correspond to descriptors and the refinements correspond to splitting
strategies. To use global search to implement the planner specification, we need to select
a suitable representation for sets of potential solutions (which, in the refinement view of
planning, are essentially the partial plans). The global search tactic would then set up a
search algorithm that can split a solution-set and extract solutions that meet the problem
specification. KIDS provides global search tactics for primitive data-types such as sequences,
sets and maps. If a complex data type is needed to represent the potential solution set of
a task, the user must implement a global search tactic for it.
Since we are interested in state-space planners initially, we chose to represent the partial
plan as a sequence of operators (actually sequence of operator indices). This allowed us to
use KIDS global search theory for finite sequences.

3.4 Specifying Distributive and Monotonic laws

One aspect of KIDS specification that is slightly unintuitive to new users is the need to
specify distributive and monotonic laws on all the operations used in the input/output
specification (e.g., no-moves-back in the specification of the progression planner shown in
Figure 5). Distributive laws state how a specific operation distributes over other operations
(e.g., (A + B )  C  (A  C ) + (B  C )), while monotonic laws provide a set of boundary
conditions (e.g., A +0 = A). Such laws should be explicitly stated for all operations involved
in the specification to support instantiation of design tactics, as well as optimization of
generated code. Specifically, KIDS has a directed-inference engine called RAINBOW which
uses the task specification and the distributed laws specified by the user to simplify and
reformulate the expressions in the synthesized code. Deductive inference is the primary
means by which KIDS reasons about the task specification in order to apply design tactics,
and optimize the code, and derive necessary pruning conditions. Distributive and monotonic
laws indirectly provide KIDS with information on alternative ways of defining predicates.
A useful heuristic in writing laws is that they should be simple, normally expressed in
terms of the main function and perhaps another function to handle boundary cases (called
cross-functions; see below). As an example, consider Figure 5 where function no-movesback is a domain independent pruning test used in the specification of progression planners.
Recall that no-moves-back is called on a state sequence and checks that a later state is
not a subset of (or weaker than) an earlier state. Calling no-moves-back on a sequence S
which is a concatenation of state sequences S1 and S2 is equivalent to calling it on S1 and
S2 and testing that no state in S1 is weaker than a state in S2. Notice that the first two
tests can be handled by no-moves-back itself but the last test needs a new function. We
call this new function a cross-function for no-moves-back (cross-no-moves-back). The
monotonic laws for no-moves-back include:



no-moves-back over a singleton state sequence is true.

104

fiSynthesizing Customized Planners from Specifications



no-moves-back over an empty state sequence is false (useful when the selected action

is not applicable).

Similarly, the distributive laws for no-moves-back include:



no-moves-back over sequence concatenation is equal to no-moves-back on S1 , nomoves-back on S2 and cross-no-moves-back on S1 and S2 .

 When a state A is prepended to a state sequence S , applying no-moves-back over

such a combined state sequence is equivalent to applying cross-no-moves-back on
the singleton sequence [A] and S , and no-moves-back on S .
 When a state A is appended to a state sequence S , no-moves-back over such a
combined state sequence is the same as no-moves-back on S and cross-no-movesback on S and the singleton sequence [A].

All these rules, while reasonably obvious to us, are nonetheless very crucial for the
effectiveness of KIDS as they help it in reformulating and optimizing the generated code.
An example of their use, as we will see in Section 3.5.1, occurs in Figure 7 where an \if
[condition] - [then] - [else]" statement gets simplified to just the \[then]" part because all
the conditions in the \[condition]" can be proved to be true in the context of the input
specification, given the distributive laws.
Using the task specification, the selected design tactic { global search, and distributive
laws, KIDS produces a correct but naive code, as shown in Figure 6. The code is naive
because the same checks (for example cross-no-moves-back in Figure 6) are computed
repeatedly even if they are true from their context. We discuss some methods to optimize
the code in the next section.

3.5 Program Optimization

This section explains how the initial planner code, generated by KIDS, is optimized. Readers
not familiar with automated software synthesis literature might want to skip this section
on first read, and revisit it later for more details.
The first code produced by KIDS (shown in Figure 6) is well-structured but very inecient. There are several opportunities for optimization and KIDS provides tools for program
optimization. The code can be compiled and executed at any stage of optimization. Now,
we briey summarize the program optimizations used to achieve eciency.
3.5.1 Context Independent Simplifier

This method simplifies an expression independent of its surrounding context. There are
two possibilities for context independent simplification:
 In the first case, a set of equations are treated as left-to-right rewrite rules that are
fired exhaustively until none apply. Distributive laws are also treated as rewrite rules.
An example application of a rewrite rule is:
(if true then P else Q) =) P
105

fiSrivastava & Kambhampati

function PLANNER
(INIT: seq(integer), GOAL: seq(integer),
OPERS: seq(tuple(seq(integer), seq(integer))))
returns
(PLAN: seq(integer)
| range(PLAN) subset {1 .. size(OPERS)}
& GOODNESS-TEST
(VISITED-STATES(PLAN, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
& NO-MOVES-BACK
(VISITED-STATES(PLAN, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
& GOAL-TEST
(VISITED-STATES(PLAN, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL))
= if NO-MOVES-BACK
(VISITED-STATES([], INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
& GOODNESS-TEST
(VISITED-STATES([], INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
then PLANNER-AUX(INIT, GOAL, OPERS, [])
else undefined

function PLANNER-AUX
(INIT: seq(integer), GOAL: seq(integer),
OPERS: seq(tuple(seq(integer), seq(integer))),
V: seq(integer)
| range(V) subset {1 .. size(OPERS)}
& GOODNESS-TEST
(VISITED-STATES(V, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
& NO-MOVES-BACK
(VISITED-STATES(V, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL))
: seq(integer)
= if ex (PLAN: seq(integer))
(GOAL-TEST
(VISITED-STATES(PLAN, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
& NO-MOVES-BACK
(VISITED-STATES(PLAN, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
& GOODNESS-TEST
(VISITED-STATES(PLAN, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
& range(PLAN) subset {1 .. size(OPERS)}
& PLAN = V)
then some (PLAN-1: seq(integer))
(GOAL-TEST
(VISITED-STATES(PLAN-1, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
& NO-MOVES-BACK
(VISITED-STATES(PLAN-1, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
& GOODNESS-TEST
(VISITED-STATES(PLAN-1, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
& range(PLAN-1) subset {1 .. size(OPERS)}
& PLAN-1 = V)
else some (PLAN-2: seq(integer))
ex (NEW-V: seq(integer))
(PLAN-2 =
PLANNER-AUX(INIT, GOAL, OPERS, NEW-V)
& DEFINED?(PLAN-2)
& GOODNESS-TEST
(VISITED-STATES(NEW-V, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
& NO-MOVES-BACK
(VISITED-STATES(NEW-V, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
& ex (I: integer)
(NEW-V = append(V, I)
& I in {1 .. size(OPERS)}))

Figure 6: First progression blocks world planner code synthesized by KIDS. Notice that the
code is inecient because the same checks (for example, cross-no-moves-back)
are computed repeatedly, even if they are true from their context.

106

fiSynthesizing Customized Planners from Specifications

function PLANNER
(INIT: seq(integer), GOAL: seq(integer),
OPERS: seq(tuple(seq(integer), seq(integer))))
returns
(PLAN: seq(integer) |
range(PLAN) subset {1 .. size(OPERS)}
and ...)
= if NO-MOVES-BACK
(VISITED-STATES([], INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
and GOODNESS-TEST
(VISITED-STATES([], INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
then PLANNER-AUX
(INIT, GOAL, OPERS, [], [INIT], INIT,
size(OPERS))
else undefined

function PLANNER
(INIT: seq(integer), GOAL: seq(integer),
OPERS: seq(tuple(seq(integer), seq(integer))))
returns
(PLAN: seq(integer) |
range(PLAN) subset {1 .. size(OPERS)}
and ...)
= PLANNER-AUX
(INIT, GOAL, OPERS, [], [INIT], INIT,
size(OPERS))

Figure 7: Example of context independent simplification in KIDS. The code on the right
size is the simplified version of that on the left.
function PLANNER-AUX
(INIT: seq(integer), GOAL: seq(integer),
OPERS: seq(tuple(seq(integer), seq(integer))),
V: seq(integer)
| range(V) subset {1 .. size(OPERS)}
and GOODNESS-TEST(VISITED-STATES
(V, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
and NO-MOVES-BACK(VISITED-STATES
(V, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL))
: seq(integer)
= if GOAL-TEST(
VISITED-STATES(V, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
and NO-MOVES-BACK(VISITED-STATES
(V, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
and GOODNESS-TEST(VISITED-STATES
(V, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
and range(V) subset {1 .. size(OPERS)}
then (if ...) ...

function PLANNER-AUX
(INIT: seq(integer), GOAL: seq(integer),
OPERS: seq(tuple(seq(integer), seq(integer))),
V: seq(integer)
| range(V) subset {1 .. size(OPERS)}
and GOODNESS-TEST(VISITED-STATES
(V, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
and NO-MOVES-BACK(VISITED-STATES
(V, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL))
: seq(integer)
= if GOAL-TEST(
VISITED-STATES(V, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
then (if ...) ...

Figure 8: Example of context dependent simplification in KIDS. The code on the right size
is the simplified version of that on the left.

 In the second case, all occurrences of a local variable which is defined by an equality

is replaced by the equivalent value:
fC (x) j x = e ^ P (x)g =) fC (e) j P (e)g
Figure 7 shows an example of context-independent simplification where all the conditions
of the if-condition are true from their respective distributive laws. Hence, the if-then-else
statement is replaced by the then-part.
107

fiSrivastava & Kambhampati

function PLANNER-AUX
(INIT: seq(integer), GOAL: seq(integer),
OPERS: seq(tuple(seq(integer), seq(integer))),
V: seq(integer), VS: seq(seq(integer)),
L-VS: seq(integer) |
SEQEQUAL(L-VS, last(VS))
and range(V) subset {1 .. size(OPERS)}
and ...)
= if GOAL-TEST(VS, INIT, GOAL) then V
else some (PLAN-2: seq(integer))
exists(I: integer)
(I in {1 .. size(OPERS)}
and ...

function PLANNER-AUX
(INIT: seq(integer), GOAL: seq(integer),
OPERS: seq(tuple(seq(integer), seq(integer))),
V: seq(integer), VS: seq(seq(integer)),
L-VS: seq(integer), NUM-OPS: integer
|
NUM-OPS = size(OPERS)
and ...)
= if GOAL-TEST(VS, INIT, GOAL) then V
else some (PLAN-2: seq(integer))
exists(I: integer)
(I in {1 .. NUM-OPS}
and ...

Figure 9: Example of finite differencing (on size(OPERS)). The code on the right size is
the result of finite differencing on that on the left.
0. Focus Initialize PLANNER
1. Tactic Global Search on PLANNER
2. Simplify, context-independent-fast: if ## then ##
else some (PLAN-2: ##...
3. Simplify, context-dependent, forward-0, backward-4:
##(...) & ##(....
4. Simplify, context-dependent, forward-0, backward-4:
if ## else und...
5. FD (general-purpose) VS =
VISITED-STATES(V, INIT, GOAL, OPERS)
6. FD (general-purpose) L-VS = last(VS)
7. FD (general-purpose) NUM-OPS = size(OPERS)
8. Abstract NEXT-STATE(L-VS, I, OPERS) into NS in
ex (I: integer) (## in ## &...
9. Simplify, context-independent-fast:
if ## & ## then PLANNER-AUX(##, ##,...
10. Refine compile into Lisp: PLANNER-AUX, PLANNER

Figure 10: Derivation steps to generate a progression planner for blocks world domain.
3.5.2 Context Dependent Simplifier

This method is designed to simplify a given expression with respect to its surrounding context and is, thus, more powerful than context independent simplification. All the predicates
that hold in the context of the expression are gathered by walking up the abstract syntax
tree. The expression is then simplified with respect to the set of assumptions that hold in
the context. In Figure 8, the function calls for no-moves-back, goodness-test and the
range test in the \if" expression are redundant because their results follow from the input
invariant (conditions listed after \j" and before \:") of the PLANNER-AUX function. So
they are removed by this simplification.

108

fiSynthesizing Customized Planners from Specifications

function PLANNER
(INIT: seq(integer), GOAL: seq(integer),
OPERS: seq(tuple(seq(integer), seq(integer))))
returns
(PLAN: seq(integer)
| range(PLAN) subset {1 .. size(OPERS)}
& GOODNESS-TEST
(VISITED-STATES(PLAN, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
& NO-MOVES-BACK
(VISITED-STATES(PLAN, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
& GOAL-TEST
(VISITED-STATES(PLAN, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL))
= PLANNER-AUX
(INIT, GOAL, OPERS, [], [INIT],
size(OPERS), INIT)

function PLANNER-AUX
(INIT: seq(integer), GOAL: seq(integer),
OPERS: seq(tuple(seq(integer), seq(integer))),
V: seq(integer), VS: seq(seq(integer)),
NUM-OPS: integer, L-VS: seq(integer)
| SEQEQUAL(L-VS, last(VS))
& SEQEQUAL(VS,
VISITED-STATES(V, INIT, GOAL, OPERS))
& NO-MOVES-BACK
(VISITED-STATES(V, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
& GOODNESS-TEST
(VISITED-STATES(V, INIT, GOAL, OPERS),
INIT, GOAL)
& range(V) subset {1 .. size(OPERS)}
& NUM-OPS = size(OPERS))
: seq(integer)
= if GOAL-TEST(VS, INIT, GOAL) then V
else some (PLAN-2: seq(integer))
ex (NS: seq(integer), I: integer)
(NS = NEXT-STATE(L-VS, I, OPERS)
& CROSS-NO-MOVES-BACK(VS, [NS], INIT, GOAL)
& CROSS-GOODNESS-TEST(VS, [NS], INIT, GOAL)
& DEFINED?(PLAN-2)
& PLAN-2
= PLANNER-AUX
(INIT, GOAL, OPERS, append(V, I),
append(VS, NS), NUM-OPS, NS)
& I in {1 .. NUM-OPS})

Figure 11: Final progression blocks world planner code synthesized by KIDS
3.5.3 Finite Differencing

The idea behind finite differencing is to perform computations incrementally rather than
repeat them from scratch every time. Let us assume that inside a function f (x) there is
an expression g(x) and that x changes in a regular way. In this case, it might be useful to
create a new variable, equal to g(x), whose value is maintained across iterations and which
allows for incremental computation of g(x) with the next x value. Finite differencing can be
decomposed into two more basic operations: abstraction and simplification (Smith, 1992a)

 First, the function f is abstracted with respect to expression g(x) adding a new
parameter c to parameter list of f (now f (x; c)) and adding c = g(x) as a new input
invariant to f . All calls to f , whether recursive calls within f or external calls, must
now be changed to match the definition of f i.e, f (x) is changed to f (x; g(x)). In this
process, all occurrences of g(x) are replaced by c.
 If distributive laws apply to g(h(x)) yielding an expression of the form h0(g(x)) and
so h0 (c), the new value of g(h(x)) can be computed in terms of the old value of g(x)
and this the real benefit in optimization.

Let us illustrate this process with an example. Suppose that some function f (x) has a
call for function g(x) which returns the square of numbers and that variable x varies linearly.
Now, suppose that we are given a distributive law such as g(x + 1) = g(x) + 2  x + 1. So,
after finite-differencing, f becomes f (x; c) and the g(x) call is replaced by c + 2  x + 1.
109

fiSrivastava & Kambhampati

An additional invariant c = x  x will also be maintained for f . This new expression is
computationally much cheaper than the original expression.
In Figure 9, finite differencing is performed on size(OPERS ). The argument of function
PLANNER is expanded with the inclusion of NUM-OPS, the name entered by the user for
the value of size(OPERS ). Only abstraction is done here as the number of operators
available to the planner does not change during planning. Note that NUM-OPS represents
the number of operators in a planning problem and this is a meaningful concept for planning.
All instances of size(OPERS ) are replaced by NUM-OPS.
3.5.4 Program Derivation

Figure 10 shows a summary of the sequence of derivation steps carried out to obtain a
blocks world domain-specific forward-state space planner. The final version of the planner
code is shown in Figure 11.
In step 0, the top-level planner specification is selected and in step 1, selected design
tactic is applied. Step 2 involves a context independent simplification, and steps 3 and
4 involve context dependent simplifications. Steps 5 through 8 cover finite differencing.
Finally, an ecient planner code is compiled in step 10.

4. Discussion on Synthesized Planners

Section 3.5 used the synthesis of a progression planner for blocks world domain as a case
study to walk-through the planner synthesis process leading to the final planner given
in Figure 11. In our research, we have also considered regression (backward state space)
planners. All the planners we have synthesized to date are summarized in Table 1. Although
each of these planners differ in terms of the refinements they use, and the domains to which
they are customized, Figure 12 attempts a pseudo-code description of a generic template to
facilitate discussion of the synthesized planners as a group.
The main function planner takes initial state, goal state and operator set as
inputs and in turn calls the recursive function planner aux with all the inputs and an
initial plan. All the pruning tests comprising the output conditions are maintained as
\invariants" (in that they must hold not only of the final plan, but also of the every partial
plan leading to the final plan). The goal test, of course, need only hold for the final plan,
and is thus not maintained as an invariant. Finite differencing leads to more invariants.
Inside planner aux, if a partial plan satisfies the goal test, it is returned. Otherwise,
the partial plan is refined, invariants are incrementally tested in the new partial plan and
planner aux is called recursively.
First thing we note is that the pseudo-code template describes a planner for any planning
domain employing any state-space refinement. Even the requirement that the synthesized
planner be state-space is dictated by how the new partial plan (partial-plan2) is obtained
(in this case by appending an operator to an operator sequence). It can be generalized to
support other refinements, by modifying the operation (in the current case \append") that
is used to build the new partial plan from the old one (with corresponding changes to the
distributive laws to account for the new operation).
Second, we observe that all invariants are incrementally evaluated (see planner aux).
For example, to see if the the plan in ith iteration satisfies the no-moves-back test, we only
110

fiSynthesizing Customized Planners from Specifications

check if the latest state is duplicated by any of the previous states. We hypothesize that such
incremental evaluation is the primary reason for the synthesized planner's eciency. Once
refinement and planning domain knowledge is available, context-dependent simplification
may show that many of the tests made in the separate theories are in fact redundant.
Moreover, incremental evaluations may be cheaper than complete evaluations of invariants
if they are amenable to the operations of distribution and monotonicity over the abstract
data-types.
Although domain independent planners can be given the same control knowledge that
we give to KIDS during planner synthesis, our approach is expected to be superior in two
ways:
1. Our approach separates the control knowledge acquisition from the specifics of the
planner to some extent and this makes the acquisition process easier. In contrast,
controlling the search of a domain independent planner requires the user to think in
terms of specific \choice-points" in the planner's search strategy.
2. More importantly, search control in domain independent planners typically involves
generating unpromising partial plans first and then pruning them. In contrast, our approach improves eciency by \folding in" the control knowledge into the synthesized
planner code, through incremental evaluation of pruning test. Specifically, to a first
approximation, conventional domain independent planners will add the goodnesstest either to control their search at the choice points or to post-process the generated partial plans. We specify distributive laws on how the goodness-test can be
incrementally evaluated (in terms of cross-goodness-test and goodness-test)
and perform context-dependent analysis on all the pieces of available knowledge to
optimize the code. This is what we mean by \folding in" the control knowledge.
In Figure 11, we can see an instance of control knowledge being folded into the synthesized progression planner for the blocks world domain. Contrast it to the first synthesized
planner shown in Figure 6. We notice that redundant invocation of various checks (such
as goodness-test, visited-states, etc) in the earlier planner have been simplified away.
Moreover, individual checks (such as no-moves-back and goodness-test) have been
further simplified based on the distributive laws (like cross-no-moves-back and crossgoodness-test) to consider just the newly added parts of the partial plan. All these
considerations lead to a very small and ecient final planner.

5. Empirical Evaluation of Synthesized Planners

Table 1 lists several domain dependent state-space planners that we have synthesized to
date. The planners are characterized by the domain for which they are developed (\BW" for
blocks world, \LOG" for logistics, and \TYR" for Tyre World { all of which are benchmark
domains in AI planning); the type of (state-space) refinement used (\P" for progression
and \R" for regression), and the type of domain specific control knowledge used (H1 that
limits useless moves, H2 which moves blocks via table, etc.). We will now report results of
an empirical study conducted over these synthesized planners. The study had two aims:
 To ascertain whether the synthesized planners are able to eciently exploit domain
knowledge.
111

fiSrivastava & Kambhampati

%% The main function PLANNER calls the auxiliary function
function PLANNER (INITIAL_STATE, GOAL_STATE, OPERATOR_SET)
returns PLAN
such that OUTPUT CONDITIONS are satisfied
=
PLANNER_AUX(INITIAL_STATE, GOAL_STATE, OPERATOR_SET,
INITIAL_PLAN, ...)
%% Note: other parameters are added during finite differencing
%% The function PLANNER_AUX is called by PLANNER or by PLANNER_AUX
%% Note: From the set of OUTPUT CONDITIONS given as part of
%%
the problem specification, KIDS selects all but one
%%
to be maintained as INVARIANTS. Finite differencing
%%
gives more INVARIANTS.
function PLANNER_AUX(INITIAL_STATE, GOAL_STATE, OPERATOR_SET,
CURRENT_PLAN, ...)
such that INVARIANTS are satisfied for the state sequence
corresponding to the CURRENT_PLAN
return type of PLAN
=
if state sequence ensures the satisfaction of GOAL_STATE
when CURRENT_PLAN is executed from the INITIAL_STATE
return CURRENT_PLAN
else consider some PARTIAL_PLAN2 = append(CURRENT_PLAN, I)
where I is index of a valid operator in OPERATOR_SET, and
a) incremental test of INVARIANTS is true for
state sequence corresponding to PARTIAL_PLAN2
b) PARTIAL_PLAN2 =
PLANNER_AUX(INITIAL_STATE, GOAL_STATE, OPERATOR_SET,
PARTIAL_PLAN2, ...)

Figure 12: Pseudo-code for the state-space planners synthesized by KIDS

 To ascertain if the synthesized planners are better than traditional domain indepen-

dent planners in utilizing domain control knowledge.
Our discussion is organized as follows: In Section 5.1, we describe the domains and
problems we have considered in our empirical work. In Section 5.2, we evaluate the absolute
performance of the synthesized planners in the various domains. In Section 5.3 we compare
the performance of synthesized planners and traditional planners.

5.1 Domains and Problems
5.1.1 Blocks World Domain

A blocks world domain is an environment in which each block is placed either on a table or on
top of other blocks, and the problems involve stacking them in some desired configuration.
Let us focus on two states in particular: A-ON-TOP and N-ON-TOP. When there are A
.. N blocks, A-ON-TOP stands for the state where block A is on top of block B, block B
112

fiSynthesizing Customized Planners from Specifications

Name
BW-P-H1
BW-P-H2
BW-R-H1
BW-R-H2
LOG-P-L
LOG-R-L
TYR-P-M
INDEP-P
INDEP-R

Customized for
the domain
Blocks World
Blocks World
Blocks World
Blocks World
Logistics
Logistics
Tyre World
-none-none-

Refinement

Domain Dependent Pruning Test

Progression (FSS)
Progression (FSS)
Regression (BSS)
Regression (BSS)
Progression (FSS)
Regression (BSS)
Progression (FSS)
Progression (FSS)
Regression (BSS)

Limit useless moves (H1)
Move via table (H2)
Limit useless moves (H1)
Move via table (H2)
Limit ineciency
Limit ineciency
Multiple control rules
True (every state is OK)
True (every state is OK)

Table 1: Table showing the variety of planners synthesized on KIDS. The names of the
planners follow the format <domain>-<refinement>-<heuristic>.
is on top of block C, ..., block N-1 is on top of block N and block N is on table. Similarly,
N-ON-TOP stands for the state in which block A is on table, block B is on top of block A,
..., block N is on top of block N-1. Problems for the reported experiments are one of three
types:
1. Stack Inversion: Invert from A-ON-TOP to N-ON-TOP.
2. Stack building: Initial state is a collection of random stacks of up to two blocks height
in which the last N/2 blocks are either put on the first N/2 blocks or on the table.
Goal state is A-ON-TOP or N-ON-TOP.
3. Random blocks world problems: A subset of random blocks world problems generated using Minton's algorithm (Minton, 1988). In a problem with N blocks, the goal
state can have up to N/2 goal conditions.
Some domain dependent pruning tests for blocks world were covered in Section 3. Specifically, we covered pruning test H1 that prevents any block from being moved in consecutive
steps, and test H2 which requires that all blocks have to be moved via the table.
5.1.2 Logistics Domain

The logistics domain consists of a several planes and packages at different places. The goals
involve transporting the planes and packages to the specified locations. We considered a
type of logistics domain where there are k planes, 2k places and 3k packages. There can be
either 2 packages or 1 package and 1 plane at each place. The goal is to get all planes and
packages to a distinguished place.
The domain dependent pruning test for the logistics transportation domain, (which we
call \Limit Ineciency" heuristic) consists of the following pieces of advice:
113

fiSrivastava & Kambhampati

1. Planes should not make consecutive ights without loading or unloading a package
2. Packages should either be at the goal position to begin with, or may be loaded inside
a plane and then own to their goal position.
3. Once a package reaches its goal position, it should not be moved.
5.1.3 Tyre World Domain

The Tyre world (Russell & Norvig, 1995) is a benchmark domain with complex causal
structure (Blum & Furst, 1995). In the \fixit" problem from this domain, a car's tyre is
at and must be replaced by a spare at tyre (which must first be inated). The original
tyre has to be placed in the boot and all tools must be returned to the boot. The domain
dependent pruning test that we devised enforces the following constraints:
1. If only one state variable changes between one state(S1 ) and the next state(S2 ), it
should not change in the subsequent state(S3 ). This is because a state variable describes an attribute about an object in the domain. If the attribute has a value in
state S2 that will be \overwritten" in state S3 , this might indicate a non-minimal
plan.5
2. Work on the status of boot last.
3. Fixing up a free hub is invalid { a wheel must be on it first.
4. If we have jacked-up the car that needs a tyre, we can not jack it down without putting
the tyre on it.
5. Work on the position of the pump and wrench after all the wheels and the hub are in
their final configuration.
6. Once the wheels are in their goal positions, they should not be moved.

5.2 Absolute Performance of the Synthesized Planners

In this section, we discuss the absolute performance of the synthesized planners in different
domains. As we shall see, the synthesized planners were able to solve the benchmark
problems that are known to be hard for the traditional planners. A special note is in order
regarding the plots that follow. In all the plots that follow, if a curve stops mid-way in a
graph, it means that the corresponding planner could not solve the given problem or all
problems in the problem class (as applicable) in the stipulated time.
5.2.1 Planners in Blocks World

In traditional planners, domain specific information helps the planner return a result faster
and we obtained similar results with the synthesized planners. As can be seen from the left
5. This is not true in all domains, since in some domains, the only way a state variable can shift its value
from v1 to v3 is to transition through v2 . The heuristic however does preserve completeness in the tyre
world.

114

fiSynthesizing Customized Planners from Specifications

Synthesized Progression Planners for Block World

Synthesized Progression Planner for Logistics

Effectiveness of domain-based pruning tests

Effectiveness of domain-base pruning tests

100000.0

10000.0

BW-P-H1
INDEP-P

LOG-P-L
INDEP-P
1000.0

1000.0

log [time (in secs)]

log [time (in secs)]

100.0

10.0

10.0

1.0
0.1
0.1

0.0
2.0

12.0

0.0
1.0

22.0
# blocks

2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
# planes(2X places, 3X packages)

6.0

Figure 13: Plots show that domain dependent goodness tests lead to ecient planners. The
problem domains are blocks world (left) and logistics transportation domain
(right). Planners with domain guidance perform better than those without it.
plot in Figure 13, the domain-specific blocks world heuristic H1 (\Limit useless moves")
helped the progression planner (BW-P-H1) solve the stack inversion problem (invert AON-TOP to N-ON-TOP) for 14 blocks in under a minute, and for 22 blocks in under 30
minutes. Without such a heuristic, the progression planner (INDEP-P) could not solve even
a 5 block stack inversion problem in the same time.
5.2.2 Planners in the Logistics Domain

In the logistics domain, the progression planner with the Limit Ineciency heuristic (LOGP-L) could solve 4-plane problems in under a minute and 6-plane problems in 30 minutes
(Figure 13, right). Without such a heuristic, the progression planner (INDEP-P) could not
solve even the 2 plane problem in the same time.
5.2.3 Planners in the Tyre World

There are 25 operators, 27 state variables and 6 control rules in our manually encoded Tyre
world (Russell & Norvig, 1995) description. The fixit problem was solved in under a minute
and a 31 step plan was returned.

5.3 Comparing Traditional and Synthesized Planners in Blocks World

Since our synthesized planners used domain specific control knowledge that is not normally
used by domain independent planners, our next step involved comparing synthesized planners to domain independent planners using the same control knowledge. Our aim is to see
if the synthesized planners are better able to exploit the domain knowledge than the traditional planners. We restricted this detailed comparison to the blocks world domain. Since
115

fiSrivastava & Kambhampati

there are a variety of traditional classical planners each of which have varying tradeoffs
(c.f. (Barrett & Weld, 1994; Kambhampati et al., 1995)), we used a \league tournament"
approach in our comparison. Specifically, since most popular classical planners correspond
to different instantiations of UCP (Kambhampati & Srivastava, 1995), we first ran them all
on our blocks world problem distribution to isolate the best traditional planners. Similar
study was done to isolate the best synthesized planners for our problem distribution. At
this point, the best synthesized planner is compared to the best traditional planner. In
this second round of comparison, the winning traditional planner is given the same control
knowledge as the synthesized planner.
We have used two of the three blocks world test suites { the random blocks world
problems and the stack building problems { in the comparisons. Each problem class is
defined in terms of the number of blocks and an average of 10 runs is shown in each plot.
The total time allowed for a class of problems was 1000 seconds after which the planner was
deemed to have failed on that problem class. All planners were run on the same problems
from the problem suite.
5.3.1 Picking the Best Synthesized Planner

In this section, we want to empirically determine the the most effective refinement and
control knowledge (heuristics) for the blocks world problem suites. We ran six synthesized
planners (BW-P-H1, BW-P-H2, INDEP-P, BW-R-H1, BW-R-H2 and INDEP-R) on the
above test suite. Figure 14 shows the relative performance. We notice that planners with
the pruning test H2 perform the best when compared with other planners using the same
refinement.6
5.3.2 Picking the Best Traditional Planner

In this section, we empirically search for the best UCP strategy in the blocks world. Figure 15 shows the performance of UCP instantiations with no domain dependent heuristic
information. Instantiations of UCP which do only FSS, BSS or PS refinements can emulate
classical forward-state space, backward-state space or plan-space planners, respectively. We
call these instantiations UCP-FSS, UCP-BSS and UCP-PS. UCP-LCFR is a hybrid strategy
which interleaves FSS, BSS and PS refinements depending on the lower branching factor
(Kambhampati & Srivastava, 1995). In both the random blocks world problems (left) and
the stacking building problems (right), the left and right plots, UCP-FSS solves all of the
6. We also notice that progression planners perform better in the left plot and regression planners perform
better in the right plot. This trend can be explained easily in terms of the way the refinements operate
(Kambhampati, 1997b). In the left figure, based on the nature of the goals, the branching factor for
the regression planners may become enormous because it cannot detect all the conicts among the
steps that give conditions at the goal (or at steps which eventually support the goal condition). Many
more operators seem to potentially give a condition than is actually the case. On the other hand, the
completely specified initial state helps the progression planner decide all applicable operators from the
beginning itself. Consequently, progression planner BW-P-H2 is a clear win. In the right plot, as the
initial and goal states are completely specified, both regression and progression planners can detect all
conicts. As is true in realistic domains, many more operators are applicable from the initial state than
are relevant to achieving the goal conditions. So, the regression planner BW-R-H2 performs better than
the progression planner BW-P-H2.

116

fiSynthesizing Customized Planners from Specifications

Performance of Synthesized Planners

Performance of Synthesized Planners

Random blocks world problems

Build stack to achieve A-ON-TOP

100.0

100.0

BW-P-H1
BW-P-H2
INDEP-P
BW-R-H1
BW-R-H2
INDEP-R

10.0

log [time (in secs)]

log [time (in secs)]

10.0

1.0

0.1

0.0
3.0

BW-P-H1
BW-P-H2
INDEP-P
BW-R-H1
BW-R-H2
INDEP-R

1.0

0.1

5.0

7.0
# blocks

9.0

0.0
3.0

11.0

5.0

7.0
# blocks

9.0

11.0

Figure 14: Performance of the synthesized progression and regression planners with H1,
H2 or no domain dependent control knowledge. BW-P-H2 perform best in the
left plot and BW-R-H2 performs best in the right plot. As the points are close
together, it is not clear but BW-R-H1 and INDEP-R solve problems of upto 3
blocks in the left plot.
Performance of UCP Instantiations

Performance of UCP Instantiations

Mintons random blocks world problems

Go from random stacks of upto two blocks height to A-ON-TOP

100.0

100.0

UCP-PS
UCP-FSS
UCP-BSS
UCP-LCFR

UCP-PS
UCP-FSS
UCP-BSS
UCP-LCFR
10.0

log [time (in secs)]

log [time (in secs)]

10.0

1.0

0.1

0.0
3.0

1.0

0.1

4.0

5.0
# blocks

6.0

0.0
3.0

7.0

4.0

5.0
# blocks

6.0

7.0

Figure 15: Performance of UCP instantiations with no domain dependent heuristic. In the
left and right plots, UCP-FSS solves all of the problems in the least time. Based
on the results, we see that UCP-FSS is a good strategy for blocks world. Note
from the figure that UCP-BSS solves only 3 blocks problems in the given time
in all the plots.
117

fiSrivastava & Kambhampati

Comparison of UCP-FSS and Synthesized Planners

Comparison of UCP-FSS and Synthsized Planners

Random blocks world problems

Build stack to achieve A-ON-TOP

100.0

100.0
BW-P-H2
UCP-FSS-H2

BW-R-H2
UCP-FSS-H2

10.0

log [time (in secs)]

log [time (in secs)]

10.0

1.0

0.1

0.0
3.0

1.0

0.1

5.0

7.0
# blocks

9.0

0.0
3.0

11.0

5.0

7.0
# blocks

9.0

11.0

Figure 16: How the best UCP strategy for blocks world, namely UCP-FSS, performs against
the best of KIDS' synthesized planners: In the left plot, UCP-FSS does better
than INDEP-P i.e., without any heuristic information. But when H2 heuristic is
given to both the planners, BW-P-H2 is a winner. In the right plot, BW-R-H2
outperforms UCP-FSS with H2.
problems in the least time. Based on the results, we see that UCP-FSS is a good strategy
for the blocks world problem distributions we used.7
5.3.3 Comparing the Best Synthesized Planner and Best Traditional
Planner

Finally, we pit the best UCP strategy for the blocks world, namely UCP-FSS, against
the best of KIDS' synthesized planners. We chose BW-P-H2 for the random blocks world
problem suite and BW-R-H2 for the stack building problem suite. Comparison is done when
all planners are either given the same heuristic information (H2) or no domain dependent
guidance. Figure 16 plots the results. In the left plot, BW-P-H2 is a clear winner when
both planners are given the domain specific heuristic H2. In the right plot, BW-R-H2
outperforms UCP-FSS with H2. So, we see that given the same heuristic information, the
best of the planners synthesized by KIDS can outperform the best instantiation of UCP for
the blocks world.
It is interesting to note that while all synthesized planners improve drastically with
domain specific knowledge, domain independent planners do not always improve in the
same way. We illustrate this in Figure 17, where we compare UCP instantiations and the
synthesized planers with and without control heuristics. While the synthesized planners
7. Note that in the case of synthesized planners, a planner based on regression outperformed one based on
progression in the stack building problems. In contrast, UCP-FSS out performs UCP-BSS for the same
problem suite. The reason for this had to do with the particular implementation of UCP-BSS, which
involves a costly unification step.

118

fiSynthesizing Customized Planners from Specifications

Comparison of UCP-FSS and Synthesized Planners Comparison of UCP-FSS and Synthesized Planners
Random blocks world problems

Build stack to achieve A-ON-TOP

100.0

100.0
BW-P-H2
UCP-FSS-H2
INDEP-P
UCP-FSS-DOM-INDEP

BW-R-H2
UCP-FSS-H2
INDEP-R
UCP-FSS-DOM-INDEP
10.0

log [time (in secs)]

log [time (in secs)]

10.0

1.0

0.1

0.0
3.0

1.0

0.1

5.0

7.0
# blocks

9.0

0.0
3.0

11.0

5.0

7.0
# blocks

9.0

11.0

Figure 17: Effect of control knowledge on UCP planners vs. KIDS synthesized planners.
always improve with the addition of control knowledge, the same is not true of the UCP
instantiations. Specifically, in the right plot, we see that UCP-FSS-H2, which uses control
knowledge H2 does worse than UCP-FSS-DOM-INDEP, which does not use any control
knowledge! We speculate that this is because UCP-FSS explicitly calls a function to do
domain-specific reasoning in each recursive invocation while the synthesized planners have
domain control knowledge folded into the planner code (see Section 4).

5.4 Summary of Results

In summary, we have demonstrated that:

 The CLAY approach to writing domain-specific planning theory is exible. It sup-

ports mix-and-match of refinements and control knowledge in generating a variety of
customized planners. As examples, we presented planners for blocks world, logistics
domain and Tyre domain, using forward and backward state space refinements and
different types of domain-specific control knowledge.
 The synthesized planners can exploit domain dependent control knowledge to improve performance. We showed that, in fact, they are better able to exploit domain
knowledge than the traditional planners can.

6. Related Work

The research reported here straddles the two fields of automated software synthesis and
AI planning. Although our research is the first to address the issue of planner synthesis,
synthesis of other types of search engines has been addressed by Smith and his co-workers.
Of particular interest to us is the work they did in developing automated scheduling software
for transportation logistics problems using KIDS system (Smith & Parra, 1993; Burstein &
Smith, 1996). The scheduling systems they have generated have been shown to significantly
119

fiSrivastava & Kambhampati

outperform general-purpose schedulers working on the same problem. Their results provided
the initial impetus for our research. Although their original work used a design tactic
based on global search to model scheduling, they have also since then developed design
tactics based on other local search regimes. Another interesting issue brought up by their
work is the importance of \constraint propagation" techniques in deriving ecient code.
This has made us explore the role (or lack thereof) of constraint propagation in planning.
Kambhampati and Yang (1996) describe ways in which the refinement planning framework
can be extended to exploit constraint satisfaction techniques. In future, we hope to be able
to synthesize planners using this more general theory of refinement planning.
Although there has not been much work on automated planner synthesis, a notable exception is the work of Gomes (1995). Gomes had synthesized a state-space problem solver
for the \missionaries and cannibals" problem on KIDS, and has shown that the synthesized
code outperforms general purpose problem solvers in that domain. Our framework can be
seen as a generalization of the work done by Gomes. In particular, we separate planning
theories from the dynamics and the control knowledge, which in principle supports generation of planning code based on a variety of refinements. We have demonstrated this by
deriving both progression and regression planners for three different domains (blocks world,
logistics and tyre world) and with two different bodies of control knowledge in each case.
Methodologically, our work adds to Gomes' results in that we have shown that given the
same control knowledge, planners generated by KIDS can outperform traditional planners
using the control knowledge at their choice points. This makes for a fairer comparison
between synthesized and general-purpose planners.
In some existing planners such as UCPOP (Penberthy & Weld, 1994) and PRODIGY
(Fink & Veloso, 1994), customization is supported by allowing the user to specify search
control rules that are checked at every choice point during search. Such control rules can
be used to rank the search nodes based on some heuristic, or prune unpromising nodes.
The main difference between these approaches and the synthesis approach described here
is that ours supports a higher degree of integration of domain knowledge into the planner
by folding it into the synthesized code for the planner. Planners using search control rules
cannot do context dependent analysis or incremental application of control knowledge. In
contrast, in our approach, the control information is encoded declaratively and the planning
algorithm can be optimized based on all the knowledge that is available, including the
control knowledge.
Our work on utilizing explicit control knowledge in addition to domain dynamics in
deriving planning code has some parallels with the recent work by Bacchus and Kabanza
(1995). They concentrate on providing a rich language in which control knowledge can be
specified for a progression planner. They describe a language based on temporal logic to
specify domain control rules. Rather than using this knowledge to prune bad plans after
they are generated, Bacchus and Kabanza explore ways of incrementally tracking the level
of satisfaction of the control axioms as the planning progresses. Our approach facilitates
the same, in a refinement independent setting, by \folding in" the control knowledge into
the developed planning code, with the help of KIDS framework.
There is some work in constraint satisfaction community that is directed towards producing specialized (customized) programs that is relevant to the research described here.
COASTOOL (Yoshikawa, Kaneko, Nomura, & Watanabe, 1994) and ALICE systems (Lau120

fiSynthesizing Customized Planners from Specifications

riere, 1978) take declarative description of CSPs and compile specialized algorithms for solving them, and MULTI-TAC (Minton, 1996) supports automatic configuration of constraint
satisfaction programs. The MULTI-TAC system, in particular, provides an interesting contrast to our approach. MULTI-TAC starts with an algorithm schema, a list of high level
heuristic rules for various decision points (e.g., \most-constrained-variable-first" heuristic
for variable selection and \least-constraining-value-first" for value selection in CSP search),
and a list of ags indicating whether certain procedures (e.g., forward checking in CSP) will
or will not be used. MULTI-TAC uses the domain specification to specialize the high-level
heuristics given to it. For example, in the context of a minimum maximal matching problem
in graph theory, a most-constrained-variable-first heuristic may become \choose the edge
with the most neighbors that have been assigned values" . A configuration is a particular
subset of specialized heuristics to be used, and a particular assignment of ags. MULTITAC first searches through a space of \configurations" to see which configuration best fits
a given problem population. Once the best configuration is found, it is then automatically
compiled into ecient code by using specification refinement techniques similar to those
that we described in Section 3.5.
MULTI-TAC thus presents an interesting middle-ground between search control rule
specification approach used in UCPOP and PRODIGY planners, and the full integration of
domain-knowledge into the synthesized code, promised by the CLAY approach. In contrast
to the UCPOP and PRODIGY search control rule approach, the MULTI-TAC compilation
phase can support folding-in of search control rules into the compiled code. In contrast
to CLAY which advocates semi-automatic synthesis of a piece of software by manually
guided optimization (through the help of user specified distributive and monotonicity laws),
MULTI-TAC supports fully automating the customization of a configurable template. For
the CLAY approach to be effective, we need to provide a declarative specification of the
task and the domain control knowledge, as well as high level algorithm tactics. KIDS
deals with instantiating the tactics into the specific problem, but the simplification needs to
be guided by careful specification of distributive/monotonicity laws. In contrast, MULTITAC's configuration approach needs an algorithm template that is already semi-customized
to the specific task, with built-in hooks for using heuristics. The heuristics themselves are
specified in the form of meta-heuristic knowledge.
In MULTI-TAC, domain knowledge is used only in specializing the meta-heuristics. In
theory, the CLAY approach may support a deeper integration of the domain knowledge into
the synthesized code; but at the expense of a significant amount of user intervention. An
interesting application of the MULTI-TAC approach in the context of planning might involve
starting with a UCP planning shell (which can be configured to emulate many varieties of
planners), a list of high-level heuristics for guiding the decision points in the UCP shell
(e.g., refinement selection, aw selection etc), and searching among the configurations to
pick a planner for the given problem distribution.

7. Conclusion

In this research, we investigated the feasibility of using automated software synthesis tools
to synthesize customized domain-specific planners. We described the CLAY architecture
for exibly synthesizing ecient domain dependent classical planners from a declarative
121

fiSrivastava & Kambhampati

theory of planning and domain theory using a software synthesis system (KIDS). Using
this framework, any classical planner can be synthesized enriched with domain control
knowledge. As a proof of concept, forward state-space and backward state-space planners
were synthesized for the blocks-world, the logistics and the tyre world domains. We have
shown that the synthesized planners can outperform general purpose planners when both
are using the same amount of domain-specific control knowledge and argueed that this is
due to their ability to fold-in domain specific control knowledge into the planner code. In
contrast, the domain independent planners test the control knowledge for each plan being
refined, and thus suffer a significant application overhead.

7.1 Features and Limitations

Our synthesis approach provides several interesting contrasts to main-stream AI planning
work. To begin with, most AI planning work attempts to improve the eciency of planning
by concentrating on the way plans are generated. Our work differs radically in that we
concentrate on how \ecient planners" are synthesized. The use of software synthesis techniques lends modularity to the planner synthesis activity. The planning theory is specified
declaratively rather than in the form of an implemented program. This supports changes
and extensions to the planning theory. While a planning theory is described independent
of domains, control knowledge and dynamical knowledge of the domain can be specified
once for each domain. By selecting different combinations of planning theory and control
knowledge, we can synthesize a variety of domain-customized refinement planners.
Despite these promises, our approach does entail several overheads. Some of these
overheads are related to the current state of the art in automated software synthesis while
others are related to our current implementation of CLAY architecture. In what follows,
we try to tease these apart.
The holy grail of automated software synthesis approaches is to free the users from lowlevel coding, and allow them to concentrate on declarative specification. While the KIDS
system comes closest to this promise, it is still far from perfect. To start with, the user must
be reasonably familiar with the software synthesis process in order to do anything substantial
with KIDS. We had to go through a steep learning curve before we could understand how to
structure our theories to make good use of the optimizations provided by KIDS. Writing the
monotonic and distributive laws for operations such that they can help KIDS do effective
code simplification is still somewhat of an art. Many times, we had to go back and rewrite
the domain knowledge after KIDS was unsuccessful in using the knowledge provided to it.
Advances in software synthesis technology may provide support for automatic translation
for high level control knowledge into forms suitable for consumption by KIDS; but such
support is not available right now.
The current cost-benefit ratios are such that we would not recommend using CLAY/KIDS
approach for customizing a planner if one is interested in customizing a single planner for
a single domain. The REFINE code the user writes to specify the synthesis task is typically larger than any one single synthesized planner generated by KIDS. Thus, manually
customizing the planner for the domain may still be more appropriate. However, the synthesized approaches may be competitive if we are interested in being able to customize a
variety of planners to a variety of domains.
122

fiSynthesizing Customized Planners from Specifications

In addition to the overheads entailed by KIDS, our specific implementation of planning
theories, domain knowledge, etc. also lead to some ineciencies. These latter can be
eliminated by a better design of the CLAY architecture. For example, to make our work
simple, we decided to go with one of the pre-existing canned design tactics provided by
KIDS, and chose the global search theory over finite sequences as the candidate tactic.
Because of this choice, we found state-variable representation of domains to be more suitable
from an implementation point of view. Although getting state-variable representations of
actions is not very hard (we wrote a couple of utility routines for converting actions in
STRIPS representation into state-variable representation), specifying control knowledge in
terms of this representation turned out to be less than natural, especially in larger domains
like Russel's tyre world.
Our choice of in-built design tactics also limited the types of domain knowledge we could
specify. Most of the control knowledge had to be in the form of node-rejection rules. General
global search also allows node-preference knowledge as well as knowledge regarding effective
ways of shrinking the set of potential solutions, without splitting the set (by eliminating
non-solutions).
We could eliminate the awkwardness of state-variable representations as well as exploit more types of domain knowledge by designing global search tactics specially suited
to planning-specific data structures. Although eventually the KIDS system may support a
larger variety of design tactics, customizing design tactics to task classes is very much in
line with the current practice in automated software synthesis (Gomes, Smith, & Westfold,
1996).

7.2 Future Directions

The work presented here can be seen as the beginning of a fairly open-ended research program that complements, rather than competes with, the research into ecient planning
algorithms. Ideally, we would like to support the synthesis of customized planners based
on the full gamut of planning technologies including partial order and task-reduction planning. These latter are already subsumed by the refinement planning framework developed
in (Kambhampati & Srivastava, 1996) and supporting their synthesis is mainly a matter
of supporting a more exible partial plan representation in KIDS (representing plans as
sequences over actions has suced until now, as we were only addressing the synthesis of
state-space planners). We are currently in the process of doing this (Srivastava, Kambhampati, & Mali, 1997).
More generally, any time we get insights into the internal workings of a family of planning algorithms, we would like to translate those insights into declarative specifications for
KIDS and support synthesis of more ecient customized domain code. An example of this
is the recent research on plan synthesis approaches based on constraint satisfaction. In fact,
domain independent planners such as Graphplan (Blum & Furst, 1995) can solve our test
suites in equal or better time compared to the synthesized planners. We have taken some
preliminary steps towards integrating these approaches into the refinement planning framework by using the notion of disjunctive refinement planning (see Kambhampati & Yang,
1996; Kambhampati, 1997b; Kambhampati, Parker, & Lambrecht, 1997; Kambhampati,
123

fiSrivastava & Kambhampati

1997a). In future, as this work matures, we intend to explore synthesis of planners using
the theories of disjunctive plan refinement.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to Doug Smith for his help with KIDS and numerous discussions on tactics,
global search and distributive laws. We would also like to thank Carla Gomes for discussing
her work with us and making useful suggestions on how to write theories; and Nort Fowler
for his encouragement on this line of research. Thanks are also due to Steve Minton and
the anonymous referees of JAIR for their many helpful comments toward improving the
presentation of this paper. This research is supported by a DARPA Planning Initiative
Phase 3 grant F30602-95-C-0247 (through a subcontract from Kestrel to Arizona State
University).

Appendix A. Sample Code Referred in the Text
%% Get state sequence from partial plan
function VISITED-STATES
(PLAN: seq(integer), IS: seq(integer),
GS: seq(integer),
OPERS: seq(tuple(seq(integer), seq(integer))))
: seq(seq(integer))
= if empty(PLAN) then [IS]
else
if ~empty(NEXT-STATE(IS, first(PLAN), OPERS)) then
prepend(VISITED-STATES(rest(PLAN),
NEXT-STATE(IS, first(PLAN), OPERS),
GS, OPERS), IS)
%% Used by VISITED-STATES to get next state
%% after applying an operator
function NEXT-STATE
(STATE: seq(integer), OPER: integer,
OPERATORS: seq(tuple(seq(integer), seq(integer))))
: seq(integer)
= if fa (I: integer)(I in [1 .. size(STATE)]
=> OPERATORS(OPER).1(I) = 0 or
OPERATORS(OPER).1(I) = STATE(I)) then
image(lambda(x)
if OPERATORS(OPER).2(x) = 0 then STATE(x)
else OPERATORS(OPER).2(x),
[1 .. size(STATE)])

%% Domain independent pruning test for FSS refinement
function NO-MOVES-BACK (VIS-STATES: seq(seq(integer)),
IS: seq(integer), GS: seq(integer))
: boolean
= fa (I: integer, J: integer)
(I in [1 .. size(VIS-STATES)]
& J in [1 .. size(VIS-STATES)]
& I < J
=> not (fa (INDEX: integer)
(INDEX in [1 .. size(first(VIS-STATES))]
=> VIS-STATES(J)(INDEX) =
VIS-STATES(I)(INDEX)
or VIS-STATES(I)(INDEX) = 0)))

124

fiSynthesizing Customized Planners from Specifications

function CROSS-NO-MOVES-BACK
(R: seq(seq(integer)), S: seq(seq(integer)), IS: seq(integer),
GS: seq(integer)): boolean
= fa (I: integer, J: integer)
(I in [1 .. size(R)] & J in [1 .. size(S)]
=> not (fa (INDEX: integer)
(INDEX in [1 .. size(first(R))]
=> S(J)(INDEX) = R(I)(INDEX)
or R(I)(INDEX) = 0)))
%% Domain independent goal test for FSS refinement
function GOAL-TEST
(VIS-STATES: seq(seq(integer)), INIT: seq(integer),
GOAL: seq(integer)): boolean
= fa (I: integer)
(I in [1 .. size(GOAL)]
=> GOAL(I) = 0 or
last(VIS-STATES)(I) = GOAL(I))

%% Domain dependent pruning test
%% Heuristic H1: Limit useless move for blocks world
function NO-REDUNDANCY (S: seq(seq(integer)))
: boolean
= fa (I: integer, INDEX: integer)
(I in [1 .. size(S) - 2]
& INDEX in [1 .. size(first(S))]
& INDEX mod 2 = 1
and S(I)(INDEX) ~= S(I + 1)(INDEX)
=> S(I + 2)(INDEX) = S(I + 1)(INDEX))
%% Domain dependent pruning test
%% Heuristic H2: Move via table for blocks world
function NO-REDUNDANCY (S: seq(seq(integer)),
INIT: seq(integer),
GOAL: seq(integer))
: boolean
= fa (I: integer, INDEX: integer)
(I in [1 .. size(S) - 1]
& INDEX in [1 .. size(first(S))]
& INDEX mod 2 = 1
& S(I)(INDEX) ~= S(I + 1)(INDEX)
=>((%% position in state I is same as
%% initial state
S(I)(INDEX) = INIT(INDEX)
and
S(I + 1)(INDEX) =
%% position in state I+1 is on table
(1 + real-to-nearest-integer
(size(first(S)) / 2)))
or
(S(I)(INDEX) =
%% position in state I is on table
(1 + real-to-nearest-integer
(size(first(S))/2))
and
%% position in state I+1 is same as
%% goal state
S(I + 1)(INDEX) = GOAL(INDEX))))

125

fiSrivastava & Kambhampati

References

Bacchus, F., & Kabanza, F. (1995). Using temporal logic to control search in a forward
chaining planner. New Directions in AI Planning: EWSP 95, IOS Press, 141-153.
Backstrom, C., & Nebel, B. (1993). Complexity results in sas+ planning. Research Report,
Dept Comp.and Info Sc., Linkoping Univ., Sweden.
Barrett, A., & Weld, D. (1994). Partial order planning: Evaluating possible eciency gains.
Artificial Intelligence, 67 (1).
Blum, A., & Furst, M. (1995). Fast planning through planning graph analysis. Proc IJCAI95, 1636{1642.
Burstein, M., & Smith, D. (1996). ITAS: A portable, interactive transportation scheduling
tool using a search engine generated from formal specifications. In Proceedings of 3rd
AI Planning Systems Conference, pp. 35{44.
Fikes, R., & Nilsson, N. (1990). STRIPS: A new approach to the application of theorem
proving to problem solving. Readings in Planning. Morgan Kaufmann Publ., San
Mateo, CA.
Fink, E., & Veloso, M. (1994). Formalizing the prodigy planning algorithm. CMU CS Tech
Report CMU-CS-94-123.
Gomes, C., Smith, D., & Westfold, S. (1996). Synthesis of schedulers for planned shutdowns of power plants. Proc. of 11th Knowledge-Based Software Engg. Conf., IEEE
Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos,CA, 12{20.
Gomes, C. P. (1995). Planning in kids. Technical report RL-TR-95-205, Rome Laboratory.
Kambhamapti, S. (1995). Comparative analysis of partial order planning and htn planning.
ACM SIGART Bulletin, 6.
Kambhampati, S. (1997a). Challenges in bridging plan-sythesis paradigms. In Proc. Intl.
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-97). Morgan-Kaufmann.
Kambhampati, S. (1997b). Refinement planning as a unifying framework for plan synthesis.
AI Magazine, 18 (2), 67{98.
Kambhampati, S., Katukam, S., & Qu, Y. (1996). Failure driven dynamic search control
for partial order planners: An explanation-based approach. Artificial Intelligence, 88,
253{315.
Kambhampati, S., Knoblock, C., & Yang, Q. (1995). Planning as refinement search: A
unified framework for evaluating design tradeoffs in partial order planning. Artificial
Intelligence, 76, 167{238. Special Issue on Planning and Scheduling.
Kambhampati, S., Parker, E., & Lambrecht, E. (1997). Understanding and extending
graphplan. In Proc. 4th European Conference on Planning. Springer Verlag.
126

fiSynthesizing Customized Planners from Specifications

Kambhampati, S., & Srivastava, B. (1995). Universal classical planning: An algorithm
for unifying state space and plan space planning approaches. New Directions in AI
Planning: EWSP 95, IOS Press, 61-75.
Kambhampati, S., & Srivastava, B. (1996). Unifying classical planning approaches.
Tech. rep. ASU CSE TR 96-006, Arizona State University. Available at
http://rakaposhi.eas.asu.edu/yochan.html.
Kambhampati, S., & Yang, X. (1996). On the role and utility of disjunctive representation
in refinement planning. In Proc. Fifth Conf. Principles of Knowledge Representation
and Reasoning (KR-96), pp. 135{146.
Lauriere, J. L. (1978). A language and a program for stating and solving combinatorial
problems. Artificial Intelligence, 10, 29{127.
McAllester, D., & Rosenblitt, D. (1991). Systematic nonlinear planning. Proc. 9th NCAI-91,
634-639.
Minton, S. (1988). Learning effective search control knowledge: An explanation-based
approach. PhD thesis, Carnegie -Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.
Minton, S. (1996). Automatically configuring constraint satisfaction problems: A case study.
Constraints, 1 (1).
Minton, S. (1990). Quantitative results concerning the utility of explanation-based learning.
In Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 42, pp. 363{392.
Penberthy, J., & Weld, D. (1994). UCPOP: A sound, complete, partial order planner for
adl. Proc. AAAI-94, 103-114.
Russell, S., & Norvig, P. (1995). Artificial intelligence - a modern approach (chap 13).
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Smith, D. R. (1990). KIDS: A semi-automatic program development system. IEEE Trans.
on Software Engineering { special issue on Formal Methods, 16, No.9, Sep 1990.
Smith, D. R. (1992a). Structure and design of global search algorithms. Kestrel Tech. Rep.
KES.U.87.11.
Smith, D. R. (1992b). Transformational approach to scheduling. Kestrel Institute Tech.
Rep. KES.U.92.2, 54pp.
Smith, D., & Parra, E. (1993). Transformational approach to transportation scheduling. In
Proceedings of the 8th Knowledge-based Software Engineering Conference, pp. 14{17.
Chicago, IL, Sept 1993.
Srivastava, B., Kambhampati, S., & Mali, A. (1997). A structured approach for synthesizing
planners from specifications. Proc. of 12th IEEE Intl. Conf. on Automated Software
Engg., Lake Tahoe, NV.
Tate, A. (1977). Generating project networks. Proc. 5th IJCAI, 888{893.
127

fiSrivastava & Kambhampati

Yoshikawa, M., Kaneko, K., Nomura, Y., & Watanabe, M. (1994). A constraint-based
approach to high school timetabling problems: A case study. Proc. NCAI-94, 1111{
1116.

128

fi
	ff
fi 
			 ! #"$ % 
'&)(+*, --(/.0, 12436555

B

789:; <)(/=
-/>8?@9	%&<A1/=
-(

CEDGFIH4JLKNMPOQFRDTSVU/MPWYXZC[O0U/O]\ZO0UXZW_^a`0bc\Zde`0\ZbfFRDg^EhiOj`F+k
SlFROd;bcUmn`0UCoXZO

prqes#tjsvuwt$xy{z|~}#

jE6Lj[$Qj~

Y'A/a
 a/
QL
i +I
)+Z~
+/j!


)f
aLE48~
aw/4G4
6Eff !~ ;

8RL~6I
48aLG/E4/6848Z8844+
4!i~!a;Z[ff 84LYY48/!E
a/8o
~
/!LQ/e8a  v/8~4
fffL!/L#e
 0~4/e4;4o
Y4
/
/~;
0Iff
/)/448P4~8/0
44
! 8/~'88fa4e
4a
L
44!4$88

[a/48f/48L{ff~4/a48~8/G8/
e4Paff
/P4Z[/ !~Pff;P'ra~/
6I)$ LY4/404c84f48[ 44Y48Q
e;~4RA
446+/i/8~L/8I+Za4L!G  84/4$#{
#4+44LRff!c#/
E//884E8RfP! ff8
8~8/ +I;
w8rLE48rr!A4n44Gff 8  4
4!fen!/ /8//e8wZ/ I4{/8~L/8
4LwIGL4ff   
4/4##48~E4
4;ff848)64!i8e

/8!~E8~8/P44
;E4Y4+8#4Ai4P )QP/8~L/)QA4/688/A/444n44 8
A8
/8

 	ff
fiI	 
 !"!#%$ &('*)	+ !,!# .-/01)	/'1324)/5'61/'*$"187!8#,9(/#:;'*)	+<,$ 8#9 24  !:
:89	#)	"!>=5,!#?$ ,@"AB"$"!+C:,! '*1.$ .)	#?8D/<,9	+!#%$"!:E=5.$ EF"AB"$"!+G $"1<'*$ <, IHKJL =&8'6,/M
N!O/O/P	Q6RTSG"AB"$"!+U"$"1<'*$ <,1?8VW:.1!'*$"!:X/'*AY'Z8'[9/1X*\BZ8'$ 8#,9]$ ,?8#%$"1'*)	##,!'*$ 8)	#
^ $_=`!#?"AB"$"!+a'*)	+)	#,!#%$ RbS5::8#,9@c AY"$"!+d"$"1<'*$ <,1e$")3V'Z8/1 8'/Zf"AB"$"!+g:,! '*6.$ .)	#
HK:,h0Z.!M/iF/' jY=)/1$ M%kml!.$"!MN!O/O/n	QoZ.!/:o$")p=&$q=``'/Z8ZY>rtsKutv,wxsKvBu"y1z{rt|}r*s_y*~z%ytr*w!u6sK,
*\,/+Z.!)/2q=&'13 01,)x=&#;8#Vf.9	<, !0N>/#:3nYR
5+)	"$'*)	++)	#c1)	/'1c2)/'11/'*$"1.7!8#9cHK/#:c'*)	+<,$ #,9%Qff:9	#,)	"!`/ ^ !#$ ,
<"e)/2'*)	#B'*$ p/#:;$ ,!8p:,6.-$ 8-/!5 <'1I/pj/1#,!Zq:89	#,)	"!bHK:,bh0Z.{k8ZZ88/+MoN!O/	%
l!8$"!M`N!O/	%`:,h>Z.>$D/ZR.M`N!O/O/n	Q6RFi;)/1)x-/!M$ (+)	"$D'*)	++)	#+$ ,)B:?24)/D'*)	+<,$ 8#,9
$ ,!"{'61/'*$"1.7!$ 8)	#/ ^ !#c$ ,{<"L)/2oSp  <+$ .)	#B_/"!:@o1<,$ ci/#$"!#/#'*eYAY $"!+
HKSffi[B6Q@HK:,3h>Z.!M&N!O//Y&l&!.$"(kT:,Vh0Z.xM&N!O/	%&,)/ ^ <kT:,Vh0Z.!M5N!O/O/	Q6R[3=&8Z8Z
 1 ${*\YZ/8#I$ ,(:.'<Z.$ .!p=&8$ ? <'6E/#? )	/'1/#:?$ ,!#E:,! '*1 ^ b$ ,!Z8!+!#$ >)/2)	<,
1)	/'13$ $&/::, !1$ ,!">:.'<Z.$ .!!R


, --(e %%!<4
<A/
`f
!fi:R
9!	%&%_		&/%j%/ <}

fix08Y

 (}"/e1/.!a&8 E" /1E61/*"1.! 8	>/8	,	"!D80 > ,["!E"

@*Y	,!% 8/8] ./&868 /!.E,@"[ ,!."B /* V , /WY!/88/" /B
1;11/*"6.! .	5/ff8	,	"!5*/  !"	3"( ,018{888/% 688"!`/"	
 /	 8 .	/"!%"!*/`5 ,L%>`/ 6c88/% 6888"!ff"!("b&*B	,!B
 8/ff/!E/>*Y1!  .	L e*/  ! 	I"; 8.8	,	 L /.!((`	,  8	/8./
 8`1/.!/.4!" //Vff[c8! //@*Y	,!% 8/Y>`/!%Y8 	!% 
K / &,e0.!!//	6
8&..@/p8!;"@cB,@/ ! !11F	B ,	 ,bff[&86""! 
"*	"1	 ,{ .L/ff[c8!8 K  }/!//Y,p>.!!//Y  / p08!!//Y
  !  8b  1Y!!/B`	8880  }`	""/5!/Bx6  Y18,0/"!	 ,(4	8.}&8,
8% . .	o8!,16/*"1.!`/8,8	,	 !ff/{	./! /.!V/,ff	,8ff6 !.b8"1!""!
8W/8	,	 ! , 4/ /	,;1 !.],!?*	."F8!	"(/4"!	,88%""
!""!F83	,	"! 5  8 V"	e 4 !*D*1."1.	 1/5	" /.>8		"!
,1/ /	,e/"> 1;(*1."1.	3"*	";B"!8!8 5 >/f !/"	.
 ./f/b c/%BE!	,	E"I11/*"1.@ ,@8	,	 !>/8%" !"F&}/x/. ,	,	
" /1@6//1(*,8" 4/*	, 8bff&Ic8!8 K /1,{08!!//	6, 6
41/`/ c !"*,8"4/4Y 8,,
p,/ ,D8  ,5. ?" /1[41/`/ Y>/D*	, ,;8		"!  /"!E	(888*
8,( /	 . .	/"!%"!*!658 5 ,!8p*	,  .	/q*	.*,.38&,/p4/1/8.c .!"
 /  8!/f Y""!,! *18 .	` &10!/ 8.@/*!  8.{"(!	8,15,	8@0*	B
""1* 8,; !"c! *1. 8	V5*,/./& 6 / ?80 ,c"/	.//[/&F"B""!
""1* ,   *		,!%>8%"1*	,!* 8Y.,6   }Y88,V*	,  8	/*	8*B.I	1/%"!
8D"1f/ 6b /  .!f/b*Y" !!.e 4Y8D1/* *//f	,ff*B6.!*/ff ,}&
 ( !/./1(8 .	%	,L!(!/{e6,	8*p/&`K/88, !"b8, ,L */5/
8		" 8L"B""!V,/@ , 4/ 06,	8*{/5/"!* /q*	.*c Y""!"8,
8;"B""!C,! *1. .	   6 8  .	f.>0/ E/  />"(8("/1"! D ,
*!* ./!,! (/p	,	 8/.//6. bY/ 8 ./@*B/ .	]/L ,V ! . 8,I"B""!
,! *6. .	% 1/`*B/8,{ ,5"/	.///e "1* , !"B""!! *1. 8	o&41/*
`/ E`3 /8,/!8/W8 8D/, !  !b 8D  88b	b//b1x/!/ 
"K8E,!88,;>!,	,D Y""!C,! *6. .	>	E581	,b8	,	  8(/.//6. D 
	1/%"!3"p*!* .//
0 	/6V> !"!%8@ 8/"!V	V  >/8V,!/,&1@/, !1 ,
 /.!!% .	,!3}//
{b/}%4q4
	!ff	fi	},	[ /	"b ,,
 8	E/&F*	"!Y,!*c&1EeF"B /* 8/.?*	 "1/8,!E /	 . .	/"!%"!*
 011/*"6.!0/8f*	 ""!*%/"![8		"!    &86,/!/! Y!/ "/6#
 [ ,}
 " /1@61/*"1.! 8	/o8	,	"!*/ 1!"	(" Y% /* 8L !""68* .	`	V
*	"!%!*/cY!/./88(/o*	% $8* 0*/  ! 	I"V ,18b88"!p/
*	"!%!*5/(/1,!8	,	"!*/  !"	"e. 6888/ !
 [p/,/e.! 
1!""18* ./@"B ?/5*	"!Y,!*!DYx&/'
 &)(+*-,./0&&
01324,5)67013298:;:=<?>/&1
18D88/ 688"!& "!8/q/"  @  &8 /f! "!"/6D58 ,	,	,@,/
	1/" p	B
 A;A   1!"!  8	I/*	"!Y,!*!{85 ,b	"{*	/*`,
b"	(	1/"!b	E 8>  !"!%  .	E D/,/> !&. ?1!"!*0"
  /1V1 !"!%  .	
CEDFD

fiGIHJ
KLFMNPO
QRK-JISBTUOVW
H
QETXQ;YQRTZW
V[ff\^]ffY_ff\^Y]^KJM`[-aQR\^KbSBK-QE_]^TZc!\^TXH
WQ

defhgjikil-imnporq?osgFtuvorgFwxygzxwjt{imy|u}~x?gjimny|moFtff?xtmyto!X-`R7B4!X
!X!!RZ!7
^X^7`s^s7sX;=P-7Z7^Z!)XEX^r`rR'X^s
`!X!!!;^``s``R7^R!e^z#!`r`%``s``R7^s
 `'7ff!XX^ZRs7`s7%rZsEE^r'!ZPF7`s^s7'=;
X^s#Xh)r!;^s!ErXh`R7^!eUI!rz!rsP{`!R
ER!7`rRXsZ!=X^`s#^I4X4!7^
X7r!)7%)^s-!PpXr!
!^s``%``s`R7^sse^!PZ`E`%``s`R7^ssF%X^srX`
RsXZZ)rPrs^{`%``s9``R7!^Zr!7`s^s7!;^X`
74^`Zr!^s7!UrX'!4X^XPR!Zse
e=uptyjmiozu

|
wy|
up}xgzimnuimiu
k~in
m|osto!Z^z4Z7`7

^s7X-E=%jr-7X^rXp^!E4!!R^s^r!7%`R!7^'XX4!
X^`shZRR!7`rEZrsXIX^sXZZr!!hZ^!^'XX4!Z7RU
`rEZs'!s^rE!=7ZZre^!X!!RZI!)`!7
^X^
7`sffs7sX=R!ff`rs`h!s^rR`7`s^s7sX^s7)
ZrZ{^!`
'!!ReI!rF!rF^7ZZI4X4!XZ7RZ`rEZ^!4Z^7'
7EZ`rRZh!4XXrEX!XX!e
rr!R!-PRF%XX^BE!Z!X`Xs!`X^Z'``s``R7sr
7`s^s7ss!'XX4!Z7RZ`rRX!4^I!r7)^sffrePX^X4E!Z
^XhR!-`rs`7X7%ZRsZr`rR4X^s`!X!!!^
`%``s`R7^!eP=!Xr!X!EXRX4XX`^^r!R-+E!Z^
!
XXXX!h7``R!-`!7XXZ`rR^R^rR;`%``s``R7^BXP^=!r!`)s7
srX^s^UrZ'!~s!`X^!
Zse
XZ`rR7ff!X;')r!!r=R!R!X!;X4!RX^#X`R7^7+
!`s
^s4-`%^sU+
!`s{X^



sE-`r



sRff`rss!!B7)^rsEs!!Ee';U

^^^s`P!E^ss!-`=4XX?^rRZ%X^RrZZs)!Zs!`;X4X?7Z7
ZsXr#!rIU)rs7s;7^X`;)rPrs{^!E!IrXsreXR`r
^P!EZ'X!`s`)XXX!Xff=XRX=`R!ZZ''%^sU+!s'XXr
Z^rX!)!s!)rs!s7``R!Xff!4^ZXj!XshjRZsre
 s7?ff^B7X7%Z!?^!Z!!RZ^r)s^!PZ^B``s`R7^=^P!X`
^`%``s!`rZe``R^!r#^``s!`rZXr~^h)r``r#^7#
Z7^Z!P!Z!!EZZs!X^`XXs7X7%Z4X^=7`Rs;r!

 X^r)s^sffZ!

^`%``s``E7^zEe~X!Z!ffP`rR`^7^Zh!4X4!
X^`sXff`P
!sr=4RR!7`rEZsZ!!X~X^sX^7`s^s74!{s{^#7`R!7X
!4XX4!X`s7`s^s7!eX`r
RZ!=ff)r!X
XXrZ
RXrs^r!X?X`r=Xh^)rse
X
rXB``E7^s{!XZzre'Xff`%7^^!Z!7`sffs74X

 s3

Zd!z^ZRE!7`rRZrs!X7``s7ff+!`s#X^sr!^F=X^=XRsXZ
`I!R!Z^XZ`rR^Rp%^sU+
!`s^Xre^sXff`%7
^r!rr!s4!'7``E7X^7sff^s7s'X

 s7X!!R4!Zrh^Z!

`%``s``R7I^r`rE4XX'^#7Z7^Z!7
^X^7`s^s7sre

 s7Z^

3Rj
	fiff
R
=fi
 !"+#!"$z% "&fi'($!
r)+*,-

./!"*
0/
12j
 3(4 5 6$+ff
r64(
	3-fi"ff (ff7ff
$fffi
r78!"*:9;=<>2ffff@?BA 

ff +C D)E9($-
**:9+!" F
+GH8!"*:9=,!4**I
zC=+&AJffR%*-K71r`

LsM<EN$ +$Jfiff(PO>!"!4*Q&+ RO>$fffiSfiffff(Q"-rfiff1 +CA*94,
fffiSfiffffC+"()+Cz


TUV

fiW4XMY(Z[]\_^a`

C

A

B

B

C

X

A

B

C

A

Y
E
D

E

D

E

D

Z

F

F
F

bGced>bGfMdgbGh
l1m

bGi
n

o6prq>s]t
v3oprq>s]t
u

u

bGj
vw
w

x

n

y-z{p,|~}Bpq>s

v y-z{p,|~}Bpq>s

u

u

bGk


v(x

n

y-w4N_}pFq>s>
v -y w"N_}pFq>s>

u
u



vx

F/IG =aBG32e3G3+B+/a/IaeJa/I/Je/+M/raeaJF@H 
M/3B3JB_]gHJ M5JMrJBI.Ia3FG3B+]a/Ia3J+Je] 3%/
GeGP]GPJ+ N64GPEJ+J,aBa//IRJFJaG]4I/J3]_3B]I_-_

7G+JJ/JJ+/MEJBIMa]GBIa3_G3aB3P=G3G_3G3B+]a/I]JG 
3~3R%/5e3+aBG+JF%G=BIG /IaJ.BIM/BG/@JNG=M33~3J/JJ/a
]aga32 {]3GJ]_3B]I_F%G32a+(e]G4JJ/JJ/a]_3B]I>J{B_+JBgG
]M]J.a] IGI34>IBIM3~a3aBJ{P.aJ]//I]_3B/I5=/I#BIagaa]G
3 +_6{_JE"JJ]aJ3%JM/3J4 +#G3/I 3%M.3Ma87

FRR{IN_ Ma@6D6
2 ]M]%3B]I%]+_/J6eG38MJ3a] IaI]%JMG3/3J]G
GJ/IJ4BIa3_G3aBEJ2+a +JB/3]Ga] IGI3G(GJMa ++a +JB8
3 /Ia2J=a] IGI33{aJ]a]JHBIe]B36J.Re/H3Je~JB]R +g /IaI
GBIM3~a3aBJaG3]~eaaBaeJBg  +] /IeG%JGI /IaJ+J
EJ+2J]a]a+=Ia3JIa>J#JaJa]Ga]PaIe1Jaa >J+>Ja +JB+/3gG
a] IaI3

Nr_g+2a3_Ea.D(E

eG38J3M] IGI]37aa+B1BBB. a3GJe3
 G]7=J/N	
fiff43]3,	IJ7+Ja]/IaJ]/J_e3
/JI]J~3~3aB3

eG3

G3B/a/IRBIa]&Jr"J

J]]3#2JFJM#DJMM]]GIM]G3e#I]

"!$#%

'&(#*)*)*),+

J]/3-+/.e0"1]"2{=+a M]3,a+33rG7G3J/5JaBIIG3FJa5 &]a/]Jg/=J+a3

354%6

fi798;:<=%>@?BAC<:9DFEGAIH;J8C5E,CLK;CEMJHONPRQK;SPRKIQR<:I>TNU'CPR<VWDF<C5SfiQREMXPRE,8J;C

A

B

A

B

B

A
X
Y
D

C
C

C

D

YRZ\[]YR^

D

YR_

acb

d

YR`

efhg]i,j
l%efhg]i,j

k

lnm
k

m

d

pqefsrt"fhg]iTu
lwpqefsrt"fhg]iTu

o

k

v
k

lnvo

xhy,z{R|~}fiTT|{I"~{I|~}	T\TT}	R}	"|yMI~yM(Iy,zyM~s*yM|*{Iy,*

T'}T|{R}xR|}"R0;M}y,xhy,z{R|~}-fi~R}-~~{Iw;M}	w|}

*$%

;$~R}-Iw~w;T}

"~y,I~I}]{R|I|~~yM~yM;'~}	T}	I"}	~Rny,~R}Fz{R|~}
;y,wzR~y,I|~;,}	}	0}*|~z}	FR}	9~{I(w;,}	*RMRz}*|L'}T{;T~yG;}	sFfi}	*yG*,M
zyM}	T0}T}	T}	I"}0~Iwh|~}*I|~}	~}	~;T}*|~}	T\TT}	}	I	\yM|	
{IMcyMy,y,I"I~yTT}	yM~09~Iy,*T}I}I}*}	IhT|~}	,
 ~IwLy,*I|~}*,"}y,;T~I"}	
;w|~~y*{I,w||~}	,

';y,~y,IT~;"}	

'y,|5R}*|T|~}	TT|~}"I~y,TT}	;"

Rw~yM0'~R}	T}~~{I(wM}	y,*,,}	(w	'

~R}~fiTT}	R}	~"|yM;~yMI;~}*|~

~R}Tfi~T}	y,h"I~yR}*|~}	
T(}B~R}~~{Iw;M}	

5]MRzyMy,"I~yTT}	yM~

w~y,sI}*w|Iy,IyMcfi;y,wzR~y,sy~R}fi{I}*|s\{IM~

"~y,R}	(y,~R}IywzR~y,*hxyMz{I|~}fiFT\TT}	;T}*|
9|~}*%}*|	;~R}*|~}w|~}L~R|~}*}Iy,wzR~}	By~Iy*T}L

w~yM{IyIIy,*wT}Ly,{R|~}

"(

5

*

'05

"w'

yM~*w|5Iy,I,y,~yM}	FwIfiI|}	T}	"~yM}	M
}I	}~R},M%y,Rz0|(R}"'IyM~yM-T\TT}	R}	~"|yM;~yMs\Iy,5B}RIy~R}


|~}	T~Iy,;w}*|	R}R}"'IyM~yMy,ww|y,w~yMO~R}T~;Iw|R}I|~nfiy,I}	$y,

}	y,T}*|	

	;y,I|}	"}	R}	fi-T(}I|~}	,y(y,Iw|~(I}"IyM~yM;*

h]nW*h**TF/\
w]Lw	";c*5
L9]R"w;w


  

O-

h]n
w

*%

~I}	~R}*|~}w|~}}	yMz



O

w n'

w~*	w'5R

**;c"'5/wI//R%c~5Tw


$

]5w],~-\	*w5\(*M" h

fi 

y,IT~~y,w~yMI	

;

w|}

-

w



w'

"~/

w,~-~

 




,+




y,BR*

9/R"~

43

(**BBT5\

FwM(\F*	

		

-

T}	T}	I"}	*I{R

/c*""*/'5,

5R/R*\

wF]

;: *)

ff



 
ff

!#"%$ '& ( *)
+.- /10
+
2 +
65
87 9

 -5

-9|~}*%}*|	

/

*

5ww'**;c"'5""0c*ww-c*wM

  	



]Fc*sfi

]-5w	/\	w$c*ww'c"Tw*w"w9

xR|}"R0;,}yM
**,;

]/\

5wRwcLc"Tw

+
65

/w

w5\(*M"

/F~ *\T-fi

R5]/c*;

 w* 9]R"w;w

<

@?

y,}	

~R}I~yM

0\R}	 ;~}	Iy,wzR~y

BA

$T\TT}	
 R}

R}	~"|y,I~yMs}*

M}*}*|}*M	5

C*DE

>=

R}"R}~R}~R}*|cB

}*

T}*|(y,

fiFHGJIKMLON!P4Q
RSUTVXWZY[W'\ffV^]._a`cbXd#SUe[fhghY[W'\ffVjilknm'oqp;rsut*vwtaxyp;z|{Upat~}#*mx,mqr,66~sutavwtaxyp~z|~t;p~aows%x,m,qr
mZtus}*qrhtamt~xyp~rJxn}6qr* rff}x,m,qr8cm'xyp;st;
RSUTVXWZY[W'\ffVll_RW'g4V\ffdW'dqi^knm'oqp;rstav[t~xyp~z{p~t~}#*mx,mqr,c66Hsqrff{ust*vwt~xyp~z~t;p~aows%x,m,qr
 s{qms#rffqt*mZtBmtBsqrm'rhtaxsrJx,m,s%x,m,qr>x'!sxmtu}*qrhtamt~xyp~rJxm,x'c  
jOX6#O%4Ohh;n4q4n~%J4%	HO%#	%4qqJ8~4%
O#U4Ow#Uj# OhB4q4;qhuJOq%h%#Zh!#J;6wq%x,*JpjH4qO;
4#chJ;6wq%q%hh #h#;44~%J;O4h!4O4q%hh
h#X8~%%h##
	 Su\ffVfid#S!S Vfi%S
 4Oq	%JOq%h%O	#%4OhO~%JhhcO4Ofi4q%h%#,;~6JOh
%~*;6%ffZ	%# #h#~6J%,66u4ff;qq%  !J4q6
q446%6h#B h#@J#JOq%h%#M44OO~%4~;J4Oy;J#cXO6;h;6Jq
~;6;h;JOq%h%#46Oh~% ffO~44#~!6~MO4OcX4Oq%4%#Z6%4O
6Jq6~;6#q%
8O'%O[46q44%*~ ~;4Jq8Oh4~% ff~*4q6~;6O;
h8;4Oq%4%#;J#8OO h4c#!4q#Jhj ~;Oc4@;#Uj64q*a
;6#qO%j4Oq%4%# h84;%q%h*c'6,nq8fi#%*H;'Bu4;4
4O8;64q64q*~;6#q%4Oq%h%#;ffh[;;u4;# 44~BhuhO%j
~%4#!h#4~4O6O;4;,4XOJhO4h4;#U64q*~;6#q%4M4Oq%4%#O
;6#~
H4M~%4#!h#4~MJ;wqO%Oh~ff4#Z*cOc#[,q8O*h#!X#%*
RSUTVXWZY[W'\ffV_au\VdSUfiS!Vfi%SJi^knm'oqp;rst*vwtaxyp;z{p~t~}#*mx,mqr,66ax'hp}*qrht#p;Jp;rff}*p
t*vwt~xyp~zUat;p;*oqsx,mqr  *m,xxyp~rqr4t[M  6mtust#p~rJxyp;rff}*pBt;sx,mt'*vqm'rUx' p;q'@qm'rUu*4p~~x,mp~t~
 rht[M  mZtusqryt#p~rJxyp;rff}*p 
    qrhtwM   
 	q	sr4v	 t;p~rffxyp~rff}apff
fi   
 qrJ vm rhtM     
fi
H4qc;h~%J#U4#4~J;qq%  Oh%O;O>%h#cy##4~84O* O
#UO#!4B #/h#~*4%|JJ;qq%  
h#;O#q'% h8~%U~ ;!4h84;*~64jh4J~6J%'%
hB4q%.qrht  
 "!#$%&!#' !#(*)+",.-)0/21#)3 4!%1#)65 1#)7)&!#89,:/4';"!=<9>)?/@AB/21#)C1#)D!71#6!#8E'1#7);(*)%!#E'7 8
!#)?F2GIH>/@77'<J/@K;)ML2-N)(*)61PO",Q-N)R'7)R,S/@';"!<9> )O7'T9/4VU#WSXYTG4Z\[4W]Z_^/@AffU#WSX YTG4Z_[@W]ZD`@O!#)63!#)R4A!#4
+4!C/@C&!#'"!#(*)J/4a<J/b$)(*)a/455I)/@1c1#)D!71#6!#(*)ed>5I)"fA/4;;"b&Og-)J<J/be-R/4&!+!#	4D!71T/@!# )7)9!_-N
/477' <J/4K ;)6.7' hc!#A/2!ijU#WSX YTG4Z_[@W]ZD^kliU#WSXYTG4Z\[4W]Z_`mM!71#')gnN' !.&!71#> ' 8?7' h3/% D!71T/4&!o-' ;3(>4;/@!#)
!#)V4A!#4E-N)?/@1#)m<95I78cffpqEr%)6fA !#4ts&Mu)V-V;;I<J/@v*)R!_-NC5I4&!#.1#)8*/21T 8+!#77')4.wg1#D!PO
 )P/@C1#)51#)7)&!o D!71T/4&!#./4<9 8?/@77'<J/4K ;)M-V!# '!o(4;x/2!#8?!#)/4KI2(*)4A!#4zy*!# )R )6!T/@;o@,A!#
/@1#))6{5;/4 )PEff|5 5I)A{0r3ML%P-N)(*)61PO /+KI)6!7!#)61R74;'!#ff!#c!#51#K;)<}!#C' 7)?<3' ;!#(4/4;')0(/21#x/@K;)
D!#)P/4E@,M/2!#<9%51#5I7"!# O-V TE;)/ !#C/C<9@1#)6>(*) )6>!PO>K ' !R;)7RD!T/@A /@1T9,~1T/4<9)h-41#vIO>-VTff
/4;7J76'77)Ptt|55I)6A "{Jr3
 )% 7)P&') )=4,o/@	K 7)61#(4/@!#	V' >' )?'5E!#0;84/4;g)P&' (4/4;) )
*&

fi.h3@Q	:o.4]t.@SzMz.zMoMoPQN@M	Q4MSIM].
MIl*gI.SI]c3I.P&2Ij2.AeI2}IoA2P4M]2M&S4&oS	I9%]M2m3
* o&].Me2oAffM$I=2MlAP>	lo2E$ISDoo*2]o]MMc.oM&EMI4IV*oo]2So&N>]M
P@M3]j.S>R2oA?]_I]2Iffo]@$_o22M&j.]S>V2oA%VDI]PI?JM&2&_I2IIff*.&]o2S$M
&IAIeAM9I22.A.S>&go]oaIP&2I>o]32oAE9&9+I@&I&>2o]
]92oePP2MI>Pt*o&]o@S2oAE&IeIoeSI>2MlP2P>M>2*4So2SIoIP&2AA2S
A9oIoR=MI4I]SI2o]3j>Io32oAJ9&JN]+2o	*.P>zo>o*ffImI.P&2AA2S
 AMl#4
J.AJa*.P>zo>o*$@.A@I*P&@S&>ffI]*o2]PP>.*Q#.I2>o]AM2>9]02Mff\I@I]S*
S e
 VA  M*#A.  I  I
am. }mooI zA_M _+0_A jE * *Q *&    I
 IM e R
 l A  I   *Ae4 &  *      A @4A A  #      A 
MIJ*MIj.]IM2Me*oP>M>o*l9A*9@oA@I*P&4S&>J2M@&	.]AMP>&CJ* 9AN
& 9ANIoJ* qN
2I.oA@j@.A@I*P&@S>A2S.=IN.]AMP>+&I0gS&C>I+PgQ2I*2]0@>PP@]*2S.?jB*g
P>M>o*I 3o2M&J2Me_]S E]Mj2o&I2> .4P&oEo@]E*I2]A2 I?2Ml2>2o]292&I2P>
]DM eS&&9&EI7S I4
A   *    I  I
am. 0_A  * Q *&    I
  I  g & S

 A*   I      lAo T  .    Q   lA \ff  @A.9  AMe  R
  4  A      lAo h  .  N  Q   e   _\ff  4A.9  IMe R
@I  >  lAo h  .  N  Q   eI _ff  4I    IM  R
  \  ?@A  >  $A. h      z   l   \l_E  @I    AM   
+4]jB]j.]&AP>9Io].]]&Iz20A2eP2IooA4MI2SoJ.M0Cl]o&]ooff2M>]JM oS2]o0M&2
_IE*j.S&P>o>2&
 _ff  4A.    .     a&I     @I g  I    P x z 
 ?%\ _
 #  x
 *I I     _a_E  @A   $N *  J  _     a*I   0 j Q 
@I A   A  \ff  @I     .     A   7}I  g  A    P x z  } 
 #  2 *
 *A I     _l_ff  4I    a   J  _    P &I   3 
 Q l@A A   A
ffIPB2oAC>I4P>zP>o*B]C>zo]IS>z3Pa2o	* Po.*2SIS23o@]jff]j.]&AP>&=JM&2&_I2I
2M* 2oo*2S}Iff]o]Ic* ]*2j]aMI2oMMlPgQ2I*2\I@IJ2o*.P>zo>o*I
]]]A@SI>I@P>zP>o*l]J>zo]IS>z9P2Mlo] 2oo*2SI=S29.@]jB]j]]&Iz2&=JM&2&_I2I
2M$.] 2oo*2S I?I&@M>VoAMP>J]9IPPgQ2I*2e_I@I?2M$*oP>M>o*I




fi

















	


ff



fi 



!

#"

%$

'&

)(+*,*



.-



/10


2

 4353 406ff

2

78

43

+

<ff

3

+

<ff

9;:
9;:

+>

9;:

<ff

43

9;:

0

0

0

+>

2

<ff

2

3

2

2



3

2

3

2

0

=

2

=



=



=







3

2



?



$

@

7A

CB

3

fi

N

3



D

3

:

LK

2

fi

K

2

D

=

=



fi

=

3

+GIH

IHM

Off

fi

SD

F3



fi

3

3

:

E

6D

fi

,3

E

=J3

'3



PGIH

IHM

43 J0

,3

=Q3

=

2

2



43 R0

J3

43

2

2

2



T

2

U

4V

WV

YX

!

PV

PV

[Z

\+]T^`_WacbWdegfhdIbidjlk
m=d	bonaEpFqWa=bom=ackInsr`autoawvWbWaxfyezf[b{eg_ofhn}|4kI|,a~zna=a=zn}egd
m=d~~ga=n|,d	bWtegd
bWdegfhdIbWnseg_Wkez_Wk	a
kI|o|,aEk~ga=tu|o~ga=+f[d	qonyuf[bueg_oaStofhkIIbWd	negf[m1[f[ega~kegqo~gaI4Wqeeg_Wa=na6bodIegf[d	bontftcbWdIe/|~gd	aegdz,a6m=d	z|oqoekegfhdIb4khy
f[boWqWa=bFegfhkI]1Wd~6awokIz|ohaI7ok~knrkeSaweSkI]toav4bWa1f[bik~knrkeEtoa6[a=aw~E7)kIf[#kIbE	I 6kzEIs	 
 wg	wI=I,IggWr_of[m_#m=d~~ga=n|,d	bWtonNegd1d	q~`bWdegf[d	bxdIjk1m=dIbWnaEpFqoa=bWm=aI]M^`_Waw#k[nd|~gd	a/eg_WkekS#kf[#kI[y
kIone~kImwe/tfhkI	bod	nf[nm_Wk~kmwegaw~gf[=a=neg_Wa)nawedIjm=d	bonf[nega=bWmw+4knaEtutfhkI	bod	na=nf[b#eg_WanawbWnaldjO^`_Wa=d~ga=ClkI,d a	]
f[zf[hk~gyFo/Fawca=kI]TtoawvWbWalf[b'a=Fa=4k~pFqWf[n=,/qWnf[bWdErfyegm_7E	I kFIowIsIEI,Igg,r_ofhm_uf[n
m=[d	naw[1~ga=hkega=t1egdlk/m=d	bonaEpFqWa=bom=aTeg_WaThdI	f[mEkhy}ne~gd	bWIa=neTtoaEtqWmwegf[ aNtofhkIIbWdInfhnMf[nYeg_Wa`mwd	bWna=p+qoa=bWmwa	]Y5b,deg_
mEkna=n=_WdEr`a=	aw~E eg_Wa/|o~gdI|,d	naEtzbodIegf[d	bonk~ga)bWdIeNqoegf[[f[=aEtzm=d	z|oqoekegfhdIb4khy#knNr`a/n_4k[,qoegf[[fhwam=dIbWnaEpFqWawbWm=a=nTf[b
eg_Wa)~ga=ne/dIjYeg_ofhn|WkI|,aw~E]

 4

fi#MO

`7ToPTTWM/M4
#O, T FM+E+74,u O+7+M <O{F+L WOO ,RO,,
P,

gsuSR,O,FI+O4OE+RFO++4MF+OEOM ,;O,,

P,cS},,l+E'E,OO45,IO	F,F
`4
N+F,#F,E+c,6F4O,,
P,ucSs4ffcEfi
fi,xOI
,O,O#RO#M4`F



l5oPTE7ToPTTWM/M4!"#%$&"'#)(*",+.-/0-1#2#"4365$-78#9#78:;<58=*>78:;@?ABADCE
- >F58#GH78#I=KJ<- >L+!-/M"-1$1NO":F5<=P-$&"':Q58=PRS5HG8-//T*UO#)(
$-V78#XWZYfi+ Y R078:M5[(\78#
T*UO#)(
$-V78#X]ZY8+ YL^

N_"':ff"`"\5('N9+ Y

-/M-/##"435fi$-V78#.#)78:*;<58=6>78:*;9a
#O4),LcuL/{OF4,`F4E,'F,LOcbd`4OM+;E4E{fe

F,O,gd`

4OM+;E `OOE+7E+O +Q,
'h,Mfi,izj!kluO,
ucLdMO`i,j!mni,l
o



ucpx`qb7MF,cbO+,<+EE+ WOO Ox,SOPOO Oz,OO+EE+MPOO Os,
 WOO M
#O},,,IOrsO++64EF,x,+F4E# ME+7O+O +l<F4<,,P,X#

,+F4E+Q OE++O +4cO,SO4,7EF+{EgdNzOxE1 M, OdMs}xO,Y8t`FsE
O4,7EF+c+#F+zO4xO,xxR+E`+ zE{ OE++O +cE,OM4R5,I
#O' OE++O +D}O,,+OF4E4<,xOubF4;O,,)5,vdMu4<,E
+ `8dTfi


l5oPTxwp 

zyT|{S)}+I~l5%n
"'#%$&"#)("`+-1#.ADADC-HG6"\(\78;BO78'56=c"X- >H58#G7fi#I=PJ- >2#7

5fi$478;225fi:Q"`Nz58:ff"ffGJ[58#IJ(\78#TUO#)($1g-/#+a
#zE+7E+O 'E4isjmfi

7

8k<4iXmfi

78

E8m<E4i

7

mDj8k<4i

78

mf
E)6O+ `8dM

F4O,,)5,#F4;,`F4E,4O`+4uOcbO'hE4E<E+E+M fi
,OOF#4x {4E0dNFqF+{# WOO SisjmMi
F'4,6b 4EdNFqF+ WOO Fi

mj

7'

7'

,M[imMi

,Oi

7

7

O+F

m

#O<O+ `8dM&bO,NF&b7OE<EXd`+F,OE,	xE+ N FE
, M4MMx+E`+ E,cu

7E,F
 MO4OMc+E`+ E;

_dTE+E+M +=+ zs}iO,1EFQO'+ `8dM&b;O,`Fqb.x6,O
E{'hYE, u'{O,M4E+cO4, EFIF+db{ ME+7O+O gdzbTcbi `dMO
M,`O4+#O4I, EFF+dzbR#_dTE+E+M +
#O'RM4`F
,xd`QFO+E+7;F4,I,1P,<OM+ E+
,'bYFz,4TOl#OlFM+E+74SOF,+

o

O`+OOh

o

xM,EOoO+67Mgd`F

,,`F4MSP,s{,OMO4O,4MOF,OFO+E+4{,/OF4R,,M5,{6#
,`F4O'T+iO14O`+OOch2xOd`xOE+icME+OO Y#O4ScO+E+74EFP,
,+F4{ OE++O +

)I'V,,`VZfi*4	s,	4	V4\4DV4	\sO

)z		4Pff404	,	*fi41f4*fiV/8V	q,44Z4\481g\,M	\*/,QD4
'4P`4\0V&D40Q\9fifiV\4Q224&S\S`4VZ\9,4	,
	*fi4*I/D\V4ffQ
*SI9L4&c	4B94ff48	

SIgOMQffO64B94ff48	gV*,O%4\4fi\*
SIgOMQffO64B94ff48	g'V_I4\4fi\*
Vfiff'II	*LLq&V	Q&L\81,V4	IZfi4\4fi\O4%	4
ZM\QQ'QO4	L1DV4	0	B\V8\4Z\2ff4*64g44ff48	120*	*g4
*\&\
4,4,4ff48	1DO4	*\	4*6

'


fi%)qL)\6FI%))uD%\c)_%_I_IQ6\_F6z_cfi_u)%

,%	ff
fi,00)I)
!"$#%'&()"*%'+	%','"$(-&.%'"0/1323,1!&#5462#879%'&()"*(:;#8;(<2=;!,>+@?A/B!,'"0/C!&#DE&FG/IH&2=J;%K,'&L?A&(:MFG,'"
2=;=N(:;#8;(<2=78;23H#G&%1"$%O&P4Q2?0?A&/B78;#GH,'&,1R;%S?A/C!,'"0/B!&#TVUW"YXOZ=;=7G&[,1R8;%OZ#,>X\&]%','"0M%0TS^E;/B%',0D
X\"_XO;=;=`?A&()MaFG,'"b,1RG"I?A&#8%1"$cdFG"$#?A"_&P4eZ#]fSfg^\T`hff"$?A&#87DGX"_XS;=;=i"Ajff,'/C2?A,OPk/1&(l,1RG"_?A&()MaFG,'"$7
?A&#8%'"$cffFG"$#8?A"Y2=;=m,1RG"n(<;#8;(:2=7;23H#G&%'"$%g!,S?CR823/B2?A,'"0/B;o0"$%0TgpORG"K%'"$?A&#7e%','"0M@XOZ=;=`.`"K2787G/B"$%1%'"$7
;#qhff"$?A,1;&#qrffTst#],1R8;%V2#87,1RG"_Pk&=;=!&uXS;#GHY%'"$?A,1!&#D8X\"_Pk&ff?0F%V&#],1RG"bva/B%',V%','"0MT
wF8/g%','/C23,'"0H+qPk&/g?A&()MaFG,1;#GH[?A&#8%'"$cffFG"$#8?A"$%;%S,'&[?A&#8%1,'/BF8?A,g,1RG"$(xPy/1&(x?A&()M`&#G"$#d,g?A&#%'"Az
cffFG"$#8?A"$%0TWst#{,1F!,1!"$=!+D2@?A&()M`&#G"$#d,)?A&#8%'"$cffFG"$#8?A";%K,1RG"]%','/1&#GH"$%1,Y?A&#?0=;F8%1!&#&#G"*?02#|7G/B2uX
23.`&FG,V,1RG"_RG"$2=;,1R]&PE2<?A&()M`&#G"$#{,VH;"$#2)M23/1,1Z?0F8=;23/V%',123,'"I&P}!,1%\~G3kI;#8MFG,1%J2#87]&FG,'MaFG,1%CCT
UW"<%1R2=;=EM8/1"$%'"$#d,b,>X\&,1RG"0&/1"$(<%0DNg"$?A&()M`&%1!,1;&#W2#87QJ2%'"Az>g#82=!+	%1;%0DXSR8;?BRW23/B":%1F	?0!"$#d,,'&
?A&#8%','/CF8?A,K2#d+?A&#8%'"$cffFG"$#8?A"[.d+W=!&HZ?02=;=!+W?A&(I.a;#8;#GH?A&(:Mi&#8"$#{,n?A&#8%'"$cffFG"$#8?A"$%0TUW"*%',123/1,K.d+
78;%B?0F8%1%1;#8Hn?A&()M`&#G"$#d,?A&#8%'"$cffFG"$#8?A"$%v/B%',2#7],1RG"$#]M8/B"$%'"$#{,V,1R8"I()"$#d,1!&#G"$7],1RG"0&/B"$(:%0T
,[!Ls&0[

 KiQaNffi*KimudNffNff
UW"2%1%1F()",1R23,,1RG"V%'"$#{,'"$#?A"$%;#Y7823,123.2%'"*D&Pi2g%1+ff%','"$(78"$%1?A/B!M8,1;&#[)BeB<0D23/1"JH/1&FGM`"$7
;#d,'&n%1"0,1%0D	"$2?BR*/1"0M8/B"$%'"$#{,1Z#GHK,1R8"g7G"$%B?A/B!M8,1!&#<&Pm%'&()"?A&()M`&#G"$#d,V;#:,1RG"%'+	%','"$(]T\J&#8%1;7G"0/,1RG"
%'+	%','"$(;#6^}!HFG/1"LWPk&/<"AjG2()M=!"DJXOR8Z?BRR2%:,>X\&5?A&()M`&#G"$#{,1%XORG&%1"&FG,'MFG,1%23/1"e78"$#G&,'"$7
.ff+2#879eT@pRG"723,123.2%'"-Py&/n,1R8;%n%'+	%','"$(;%I	!"0X\"$792%n,1RG"*F8#8;&#&P,X&?A&()M`&#G"$#d,
7G"$%1?A/C!M8,1!&#8%V:2#87e:XORG"0/1"

2#87

A
:W|

 5 A






<

:| 
 |
  3i i  } <
  ]
V
 * 
6
U!,1RG&FG,J=!&%1%\&PH"$#G"0/C2=;!,>+DGX\"2%1%1F8()",1R823,J2Y%'+	%','"$(l?A&()M`&#G"$#d,\R82%\&#G"&FG,'MaFG,\2#7<X\"bF8%'"
,1R8;%J&F8,'MFG,V,'&<;78"$#{,1!Pk+<,1R8"I?A&()M`&#G"$#d,0T
sP\:;%2]?A&()M`&#G"$#d,b7G"$%1?A/B!M,1!&#D`,1RG"$#3G  4g;%?02=;=;"$7L2C3S~	3i0B3G$1$80aC
XORG"$#8"0"0/\4*;%2#;#8%',12#d,1;23,1!&#:&Pi,1R8"M`&/1,1%&P?A&()M`&#G"$#d,\YT^G&=Z=!&uXOZ#GHI23/1"O%1&()"S?A&()M`&#G"$#d,
?A&#8%'"$cffFG"$#8?A"$%OXO!,1R*/1"$%1Mi"$?A,V,'&[^}!HFG/1"_ff
 G   6 I
38   | I
G   |] ]
G    6   ]

A
{
{
i 

st#{,1F8;,1!"$=!+D	2n?A&(:Mi&#8"$#{,J?A&#8%'"$cffFG"$#8?A"b;%J2n%','/1&#GH"$%',V?A&#8?0=ZF8%1!&#,1R823,V?02#*.`"S(:27G"b23.`&FG,\,1RG"
RG"$2=!,1R&PE2:?A&(:Mi&#8"$#{,H;"$#2#]&.%'"0/B23,1!&#q23.i&F8,,1R823,O?A&()M`&#G"$#d,VM`&/1,1%0T
UW"nXO;=;=#8&uXM8/1&u	;7G"K2:,1RG"0&/1"$(,1R823,SXO;=;=`.`"_,1RG"K.2%1;%OPy&/g?A&()MFG,1Z#GH<2<?A&(:Mi&#8"$#{,g?A&#	z
%'"$cffFG"$#8?A":;#L,1;(:"Y=Z;#G"$23/b;#L,1RG":#ffF8(I.`"0/&P?0=Z2F8%'"$%b;#@,1RG")?A&()M`&#G"$#d,_7G"$%1?A/C!M8,1!&#TK\F8,Sva/B%',0D
,1RG"_Pk&=;=!&XO;#GHY7G"Ava#!,1!&#
uyff`}B0m\V$td\tCV$IuutiV$t{EBEmC8ItVCt0tu'C>
uu'
A0

fiu_;ff8
]d}Eyka$ka	ff
fi

!#"$%'&()"*"++-,./0"1&.2#34

"5&6!#"+)78&

9:5; <%=>3? : @&$%fiAB<1C,ED+@&%B1FG2-!H"/%/ 9JI /K%="/L&H%M3#NPOQ!SRT@&H"UDG"+)"WVX"Y& :
%fiZ3[\Q&%fi]^!53_M%fi`"+)78&8"<G'X"+B%WaA%bRbN
c'd+e]f(g'h+ikj*lmf+noXpqfrj*eXdYsft(oXumdGvZd+wx3>y{z}|

~|

dGvAhodGi$FzSXu@#z4|H~

JPd+eXfdF+fenoXp'f

jqeXdYsft(oXu0dGvAd+wJ3^dGvqhoXhh+fSR$4hdF+f8umz|A`

ff*<n^aNffiKax$6m	{q-xVB

8

"-B75* ; %fiU%1'%&-"DUD(

&(BR$,)%U/"1&"/!<752+NOQ!5Q&S"U%'&<)""+^!"+)78&r	PY` : %fi(
[J
	




 '&


 dGvqum'feoXpqft(dGi$jdGvqfvo'fXt(eumjqoXu0dGvZR$umv


[6WW 

3 
+

cu0G'eXfn'pqumtBpHu@XpqdFv

~z|b~C|A~|


R$y

tlmh+qXh+lw%d+eifl0d




z|~Y|~

 

C|b~|b~


umv




 dGvqum'feh+lmdAoXp'fkd+feXhoXu0dGv>^yzU~P5pqumtpUefjqeXffvWoXhZj*heXoXu@tqlmheoXhof$d+w#oXp'f
t(dGikjdGv'fvWojd+eXoXcqd+eoXp'feoh+v*Hft(dGv*

tl@h+qf3>umv

R$5n#fpqh+fM yff3#	c'd+eoXp'froXpqu0e

tlmh+qXf`3n6#fkpqh+fH y~3  8]pqfeXfwQd+ef+noXp'fkt(dGikjdGv'fvot(dGv*fWqfvqt(fkumv-oXpqumth+fum~
pqu@tpAumoXpqfjqeXdYsft(oXu0dGvAd+woXpqu0eZtlmh+*fumvbR$dGvAoXpqfh+XXqi$hl0f
 vfft(dGvqXfW'fv*t(f}t(dGikj*'ofCW{]p'fd+eXfiumZGqheh+vWoffCodf>u@v
t(dGvW+feXoXumv'4u0o$od^  c#n#f#dGqlmh+lmXd>ft(dGv+feoXumv'^umo$od^'ft(dGi$jdGh*l0f
  cumhP'ft(dGikjdGXh*lmf
h+XX*i$h*l0f

r c#  d+of

 c##{Xumikjl0
r cumvqt(fbfh+tBp

oXpqho8oXpqumt(dGvW+feXumdGv^umf(gjdGv'fvWoXumh+lumv>oXp'f

hjqjfheumv'umvoXp'fMt(dGvqf'fvqt(f+5dF#f+fenoXp'fMvqife

vW*ifed+w

d+wSX*tp{h+XXqih*l0fZum

o=j*umth+l@l0HXih+lmlfv'dG'GpAodsqXoXu0wQHumfumv'`oXpqumt(dGvW+feXumdGvh+]oXhumv'$t(dGv*oXh+vooXumikf+

]^uyka_SquGB*x*Q6u%

@

Mfv'dFjqeXdumqf]o=#d`oXp'fd+eXfi$pqumtBpheXfrXHtumfvo	w%d+et(dGvqoeqt(oXu@v'Sh+vW$ofit(dGv*fWqfvqt(f
w%eXdGit(dGikjdGv'fvWot(dGvqf'fvqt(f

ff*']}uyka	U

kPBff$VB"b&BY&(=(7D(&(B"+Db/m_VH"

&BY&(=(7WV<&B"+N5OQ!%fi'`"+)78&&fi"DV(k"+D8C"/Q/"BG'"S%b : %fi(

8

 '& 	


]p'fSoXp'fd+eXfi
qhoXh*h+Xf5

umrumvWoXqu0oXu0+flmZhumv'

 +'&Y








 '&








 

oXpqho5#fkth+vU'ft(dGikjdGf`hHt(dGvqXfW'fv*t(f85u0oXpefjft(o5odAh

5PumvodoEdumikj*l0fet(dGvqf'fvqt(fndGv'fumoXpSefjft(oodSqhoXh*h+f5h+vq`oXpqfd+oXp'fe

u0oXpeXfjft(oodkqhoXhh+frnh+#l0dGv'SoXp'fhodGi$XpqheXfHWH_h+vq

Uhjqjfhe#umvoXp'fd+feXhoXu0dGv

x
 dFnpqhou0w	oXp'f`d+*feYhoXu0dGvM^'dfrvqd+ot(dGvWoXh+umvMh+lmlhodGi$oXpqhoheXfkXpqheXf-fo=#ffv}

h+vq>{Mfth+v^oXumlml'ft(dGi$jdGXfkoXp'ft(dGikj*qoXhoXu0dGvMd+whbt(dGvqf'fvqt(f

 q& 
  umvMXqtBp>h


th+f+nq'oho]oXp'ff(gjfv*fd+wxjfeXw%d+ei$u@v'Shkth+fSh+vqh+l0XumdGvAoXp'fpqheXfAhodGi$foEffv- h+vq
		cqd+e5oXpqu@fvqffAoXp'fw%dGlml0dF5umv'`+fZoXp'fd+eXfiA


	
ff

fifi "!#$%'&(#!*),+.-,&/,+.&"-."0)12+.34$/5-.(6+.%#

798;:5<=>:5?A@CBED9F"G:H$IKJLFMONPGQRGTSVULWYX[Z]\_^I^`badc$Wdef$g>fEXhWYikj,WEf
lm$npo2X]nrqTs.tvuwcWdefEgxf
XhW
iyqc
z
fYWYm${TeX]nrqTs.t|esj~}(WX4c$W9efEcEfYWXq0\bb;WYs
 qTs"f
 Zruap  qs.fZru_a$^
 WYm0WmeTs5,WEfq{TW
m9eT}O};nOs.f
XeTsX]nreX]nrqTs.fq0eXqTi9fXReXeTm0Wl$qTs.fEnf
XhW
sX  n]XR~u
|0
h'"(%;%h5%Y('0[00YL.0TO'
_(("T;Yx(5.0YTT(
u .5[.
%T0[TTb"TYY"P_"%VYRdY0
"(%|"TT0.vT"T%._% u ".T"%K'
_(%d0.
(%.[Y0Y.T"%YT(;|0
h'"(%R%(xb,'
_((~%"bT(Y
(
D<=x<2MRMRF"=xNBJ2:,=>G:5xQR<JSVULWYXZ]\_^I^  acW*ef$g>fEXhWYijWEfYlYmEnoX]n]qTs"t_ucW*ef$g>f
XhW
i
qc
fYW
mE{>eX]n]qTs"tesj}%WYX4l$qTsXeTnRse}O}eXqTi9f9f5eTmWjc
g  eTsj  [OlqTsXeTnOs"f9sqe>ffE5iecY}(W
ft
XRWYs
 qTs"fx Zrua   qs.fx
 Z]du  a;  qTs.fZ]du  a$^
 WYm0WmeTs5,WEfq{TW
m9eT}O};nOs.f
XeTsX]nreX]nrqTs.fq0[XR5eXeTmWlqs.f$nOfEXhWYsX  nRXRbu
 %.['
_(%_"b|0
h'"(%.Y%5
00"
[000
0,""

R
2"9
"05."
9R%(xYT(%.~
2".
%"(" `
%,0Vh.0Y"%.,(O*.d
_T0_YY".
T"%9"0Y
(%%T"%%%"0.
_09
"05."
d qTs.f  Za %,0
9,"Y;%(Y
"05."
.'Ok qTs.f  Za " qTs.f  Za .YvL"
T[b%(Y|" ` .T"(.[_[5
.5Y.%(~$ qTs.f  Za
" qTs"f  Za ",%KC
_.,_
"05."
_v"%Y
_.0%..
_.,",.
.Yd
%;5
.v%%%52vYY(",."T,0Y.|(Y|".|"(%.

"05."
2Y(Y%(.v"
".",.0%".x0T(("TT0 ` %,0
h"TT0["|vY"%._%"%
",Y
T0vYhY
.T((.dTT0v%%>T2.
("%"90~_Y00Y0
",.
(Y
'|"%20Y.
Y"95000"
.[Y~9YK([%T%.9"%T%("%.
"%
00000"
.%~"(
0
5Y%T"T'
5%%YT0"%,0Y
".
%"
YhY000
_."C000"
("%._,0%C000
00
.YRYb0."(bK*0"
.000"
("%0"
.000
.
$("("Tv.
2._R%(%b.R%(x%.0
%,..R%(x%.
._%
T"%5%".,0Y0
(%%T
%.Y(.v.Y `k`  `b %Y9"9
_"0K"K
",.
Kv.
0000YTT( ud "T'%Y qTs"f  Zrua "Y0K
"00"
v"%
0,""

R
_.,
"05."
[._O$  qTs.f   Za " qTs"f 
  Za bY""."%


	fiff	ff		ff!"#$!%&#&	'	fi($)+*$,-ff!	/.10
ff*!2	3"#4	+5ff657	8%9:)3	;<"=ff"#9>"$?@A
?-	B("C	@fiff!	DffffE*4!F-4	;	=G";	#HIE
J9>3";!Aff+
"K@/4"+"#!	Dff;!E"#4
ff?L9>9>	2	@"#9>9>"#
ff"9><)3	1?M		$4	ff;!E5"	fi($(ffAff)ff!	
NPO8Q

fiRTSUVXWZY\[^]
_Z`a`ab8c^_Zdefib8fhg3i\jlkmKb+n3b+o8i^p_ZqrPbTejlb$k3spfib+onde_hkIqutvclk\b8p:qlk3eC`wb8qxe_hkIqydefikI`{z|m}j^_Zrj~_Zp:pj^dob8csxg
a d3q^c ~}B jlb+ob+1k3ob3i^mKbr+d3q^pfibej^bXqxefib+opfib8rPe_ZkIqKk3okIffZdog~m7_hejzXI
l t<B ^4 zt 
 3l> zt  A1> ^D zBt  fi lC zBt  A
  fi 
 lspfie_hele_Zq^1k3o7t  |d3qct  i^mKb3b+e+
l   yTv l   z~$4 3l   z~}vAfi l   z~$ l   z~TvA
 lj bob8p^fhe_ZqlbP\ob8pp_hkIqurPkIqxed3_Zq^p>kIqfhg~rPkI`w-kIqlb8qxeTrPkIq^pfib8\lb8q^rPb8p+ilm7j^_ZrjumKbd3pp^`abdob^obP
rPkI`w^efib8c   lspfie_hele_Zq^1k3oTejlbXnd3fZlb8p>k32ejlb8pfibrPkIq^pfib8\lb8q^rPb8pTmKbX3b+e+
3l   uvB >+ '#8\'C >M - TP  >- 
7k3efibejde}ejlbqxefib+opfib8rPe_hkIqKk3okIffZdogvrPkIq^pfiefiorPepTkIq^fhgvrPkIq^q^rPe_ZkIq^p}d3q^cc^_Zp1^q^rPe_ZkIq^p  qlk
qlb+Ide_hkIqp  jlb+ob+1k3ob3i_h^rPkI`w-kIqlb8qxeJrPkIq^pfib8\lb8q^rPb8pdobC_Zq7$Ki4ejlb8qd3qxgpfigLpfiefib8`rPkIqpfib8x^b8q^rPb
rPkIq^pfiefio^rPefib8c^p_Zql}ejlbKrPk3okIfZfZdogX`^pfie2d3fZpfik$sMbK_Zq$$ 3 k3ob+kn3b+oi6_hlmKb:b8q^plobBej^derPkI`w-kIqlb8qxe
clb8prPo_h^e_hkIq^pclkqlk3epj^dobud3pp^`adsfhb8p+iejlb8qm:bvdobyI^dod3qxefib+b8cej^deejlbyob8p^fhe_ql$7_Zp
d3fZpfikclb8rPkI`w-kIpdsfZb Ay j^_ZpB1kIfZfhk4m}pBs-b8r+d3^pb}ejlb$qxefib+opfib8rPe_ZkIqvCk3okIfZfZdogm}_fZfld^fhgejlbrPkIqfikI_Zq
k3-b+odefik3oTkIq^fZg~efikarPkIq^pfib8\lb8q^rPb8p}m}j^_ZrjurPk3oob8pfi-kIq^cyefik~c^_p1kI_q6eCplspg\pfiefib8`~p+iLej^deT_Zp+ilrPkIfZfhb8rPe_ZkIq^p
k3c^_Zp1fikI_ZqxeKrPkI`aMkIq^b8q6e}c^b8prPo_h^e_ZkIq^p 
< Z -
3
x-+Lv\8IJ41J
bvqlkmeloqefikejlbyk3o`ad3f:c^bPq^_he_hkIqk3}dpfiefio^rPelob8cpfigLpfiefib8`clb8prPo_h^e_hkIq  bvpfiedoem}_hej
ejlbyclbPq^_he_ZkIqk3TdrPkI`aMkIq^b8q6eclb8prPo_he_hkIq  m}_Zejob8pfi-b8rPeefikpfikI`abd3pp`adsfhb8pd3q^cqlkIq\
d3pp`adsfhb8p> 
  
vx241x#BM
LMwvx861J41B 7L   
6  +#  ' 3  : ' #   ' a


a

v


fi

w







6






a

6

+




7


~



M





6






a

6

P








$




+

fi



+







l





 ~

 
 8 fiC  L 1' 2   A   P '       P3h      1' l
   33^ y   '   a6P        6  a6+    y   

ff	 


 + 

fi

 

















    l   A    1   
 jlbpfib8rPkIq^crPkIq^c^_he_ZkIq ds-kn3b^okIj_hs_hepadrPkI`w-kIqlb8qxeyclb8prPo_h^e_hkIq okI` pfi-b8r+_h1g\_qldc_hob8rPe
ob8fZde_ZkIq^pj^_hus-b+eAmKb+b8qej^bX_ZqllepCk3darPkI`w-kIqlb8qxe}d3q^cv_p>eAg\_Zr+d3fZfZgpfib8fh2_Z`w-kIpfib8c 
badobaq^kmob8d3clgefikv^ok4n\_Zc^bejlb1k3o`ad3fclbPMq^_he_hkIqk3:dupfiefiorPelob8cpfigLpfiefib8` clb8prPo_h^e_hkIq 
bpfib efikclb8qlk3efibXejlbdob8q6ep}k32q^k\clb _Zqvdac^_hob8rPefib8cd3rPg\r+f_Zr3odj 
 l   '  ' }









 "!$#
'& )(
*
,+


vx241#M4J34J4\-+Lv\8I1
M  '#^8'L  4 A  6  +#  ' 
 $ '            P> 3 X  fi  8 $$   '   #L '' l ^     <   
  18A     !     +  6         '      a     M 6

    u + 7  L '' MK   A  #    ^           a  7L   6  +# 
' 
P D         8 w36  a6P       1     + ~  wxP    
 3 v     A   '#l'Lfi K   +L1fiv    v  wxP  w     fi  +     7L3   
6  +#  ' 3l



  % 





  


.- /% 

0 21


354768:99;=<>@?BADCFEHGICKJML/<NOL?=PM?CRQ=PM9JTSF>UN7CF>@L?B9:GISFPVCFE=PM<9PMW@XYPM9RQ7PMJML/<NOL9FG/Z=W@P6
[Y\]

fi^_a`,bdc7eTfhg,iIbff`jklg man,_,i/koiqpaiIkrn,mtsuwvpaxuwp vwbd` e5sffyiIuwbdz{jbffi/xvwkr|Ouwko_,nai
}'~2 OoR7O~IrdO2 ~~O wOO  5~o5w~wO5~qB  2w~  od*OOo:Yd
 dw ~ $~wo~O22YqII ~2r do 2/~/ ~qoq~Y, r2odO~ Iw2~q2w~w~Yd d2Haor*OO~w~IH5~Yda5~Y
w~ Y~O w~wOoor2w~~Y  I~22rO~  7h~O:55IaY2w2~ 5"55~w~2YI  2rd D  ~l 
OorOdw~OOoh7q~ 2 2~2 HYd dw~w~IYI 2rdawwO2aH2~OI2 Hao~aa H
2w~~Y  ~a5~OO  o O"woooHI w~h 52wI~5I"5 5~ 55IaY2w2~O~~   ~  l.O$ I~2O oo
OI55I Y2 2~.255~w~2Y/  2rd
.ho   Y~5"55~w~2Y/  2rd
.
OYOI w5q~Y, r2od
ffYKYaUBO, II  "22=YYff@Hw" I ./BYY
Yd  H255o~Dffo r2I IH2H.,O5~o 25I  Yo2wO2~55"5~5O~ w2 ~H2Y/2 w2~rd H22Hwa~O5~~OO~2t55I   Y522wOI~2oH52"rd55~ o
w~2Y/  2rdod HIO5~~5~h Yd Io55~Yda55I Y2rdRVO5~2 HV2 odrO,OYda2o55~ Y
od}'H~/Offo5d~5~~*2d roO~*5~dY2 oodr"OwYOd2o  o2r2da Hd5Y5dI Y 2d w2~~5w"~55I~Y
I  w2r~d2aY/ 2rdOw~Y, ~w~2~
o 2w~* oHdwdIo  ~OlO5~Ot/H2HIOHOI o/th~* off5I aY~t~o2~w~2~
H2o/w~~HIFROB/
D	
	fffiff
 !	"#$%&'$ff()
ff$*ff
 Oo)~2IHO~O2 ~  2~"rd 5~Y2rd 2 HYd  d2o 255~ Yd 5~w~ Y~'2d
Yd  dw~Yda5~ ~ Y~o.25IOrd5O2HIOodw Oh~H2~wOYd Y~Iw~{Hdw2w~
2,+~'O2w~'I~2 r2o Yda5~ ~ Y~O  ~l,OrOdrO~ 2 HYd  dw~Yd 5~w~ Y~H2~
-Mff25~~YId2 ~Y 2wrd5~hOd2wd~'ooHIOO . -MY d I OwY52~'oY~O5w"75h5~~O~YRd2  2~~2w/ +~~aOY~'D2  ~22~ I Yr~22o2wo.O~Yd  a5 ~oowH~2 rYd~aoqO1 0O2w~ ~
Yd Y~I~O 2~o 2~Y22 ~2~w~~w~5*O~w~IH5~2 ~Yda5~ ~ Y~OR2w~  OY~ ~~w~
555OI~r O *2 ~2o~w~~ ~*5~Y"5IOY2d r2w~o oOaoHdwd5~
 ~2~OI~O~2 Oo 2~5~.2 o.5~Y2rd{~2w"OYd d2w 5"55~ Yda5~Y
w~ Y~2d Yd  d ~ff Yd 5~w~ Y~ or~*52"ow'5o , +~2w~2/ +~O2w~2~I r2ow
Yd5 I5~~~wO~ ffY ~O ~Iw "ow~~22 wH"2~I2~ 52o2d Id H2O2Ir2 oda oowO*orYd5 IO  d5w~OIow ~*IY2Iw  ~.2r5d"a55~  2ow55I 1Y23YwOIa~O4 2I-M 

 H22 oH 
h~  2~5~o~Y2odwo6 55do52~~Oa2w= w=2w~*O~ 5~*5  H22r2rdYd
 dw~$w~2Y/  2rd 8 7
h~2w~  2~5~o"~Y2rdwUOOoOOIr2  OYd  w2owYd  dw~qYd 2~w~aY~
 oI*HI~2w~aaoo o ar"9 0"O5"55~ Yd 5~w~ Y~8 7aO 
a2oOworOYDdh ~ dwI~~5~ffYd 5~~wY~2rdY~wO; :' O. 55OdroOO5I2r~2~O   OYd  w2ow'5"55~Yd 2~w~aY~

 A D CDEFCDE! GEHGJILK,N MD! G: GOCQP* R8Sd EHMCEO GR4TRDEHGJINUO EVGOC7= R
<>=@? B
 55do52~.~ WoYd 55IaY5~OhdrO~ r2~Y5~.OYo$OI    w~ w~ORX 55do52~~
N
H2~Ooo~ YY/Ofi@ YaYO 2w~ 2~  2~2~ff5~2Oqw"w~o2  ~*OI    L Zodw2\~ [
]^_^

fi`bac_dfe/ghji

B

A

B

A

B

A

X
Y
D
C

D

C

D

C

Z

E

E
E

klmFkn
r#s

ko
t |8u

u
vvwFwFxzxzyy

{{

|_} } ~

k p
t | u
u
vvwFwFxx
{{

k q
t |;;}
}
vvv)
v)wFwFxFxF

|_~

{{

|D~

/	9j9j98*88,j9,	 )Qj/	,9 ,j/

a)

c)

b)
8
4

4

4
7

1

8

8

5

7

7

9

5

9

1

5

9

3

3
6

6

6
2

2

),	9.VX'9HO6'9jj9fV_69j99,9,	/ )9	j//B*
	9 /j6	/H 9B*89j99Vj,988 z/b !!/),	9.
8

   9 8.//8* j	f/B	/9/!8 98,/89/		f /
8 8  
bj9f9f4	jj,9,	9b99/8B	/ 
  99X 8 	'	8bjO8/	1	'z/jz96	/ 
 bfj8,		Q#//8X,j4 /NO8/	 9//	99
8\98b/X/X /,89X FV9.!V	
Q!99,9,		'	8f89,j9,	jBj9z	/9' 9,	j/j8 	'	8
//Q9j'	9 /j91 99 b9j	'	8z/
j.!>j F>f
8 .9.	QO	j89 99,	j8Q//6\ jQF9.Hj9,	4JO>> >Q 


fi!	_!j!!/B,!	jO	ff
 fi/!

	 fifi!"#$&%(')+*-,/.1032fi456'798:71;<7=<?>'ff@BAC'ffD8ED7=<F1F	GHffD@B8ED7GIFJD'7=KDGMLK84ON+;8QPMG7SR
8$)	<71K)	8'ffD3A)1'T<TGMPIGMF971GM>/)18E<F9'ffDGIDHU>'ffD71<GMDFV;8EK)	GMF171GM>$FW%(')V>	;''ffF1GMDHU<U>'ff@BAC'ffD8ED7/<F	F1GHffD@B8ED7$X
TK7:71;8$YZ<)18['ffK71F1GI\8]71;8UF1>'AC8^'%71;GMF:A<AC8$)^*`_?K<DHbadce<)1fGM>fi;8XOgEhhijlk8EDF18EDmXnO<K)fiG79o$8EDmX
adpePM8EF98EDmXlgEhhq2fi4
NJ'BF98$8?;'rftsS'ffGID79)18$8EF:<)	8?KF18E\#79'uH8ED8$)	<798[>'ffDF98ELK8ED>8EF$X&f/8]D8$8E\v71;8?%w'ffPMP'rf6GMDHUD'71<71GM'ffDm4
nl8$7?0xT8^<?sS'ffGID79)18$8y<D\zPM8$70&{}|U\8ED'798[71;8^F	KT79)18$8[71;<76>'ffD71GMDK8EF79'vGMD>$PMK\8e>$PIGMLK8e~{=<%w798$)
\8EP8$71GIDH71;8Q<)	>/~&{Mff~ff|V%()	'ff@0b4')=8&<@BAP8XffWGHffK)18/*`<2\8$AGM>71F<=s9'ffGMD79)18$8:0<D\uWGHffK)18/*wT2
\8$AGI>71F:71;8[F1KT79)18$8[09 4
56'rf[XC8E<>fi;>$PMGMLK8[~&{GMD<]s9'ffGMD79)18$8^A<)171G71G'ffDF71;8sS'ffGMD79)18$8uGMD79'b>$PMGMLK8U~{<D\<vDK@^TC8$)6'%
F1KT79)18$8EF[0 |	{ f;8$)	8^~ | GIF]<D8EGHff;T')]'%/~ { 43')18$'r8$)rXTY71;8?sS'ffGID79)18$8#A)1'AC8$)17YXJ>$PMGMLK8y~ { GMF
HffK<)	<D798$8E\79'Z>'ffD71<GMD<PMPW<79'ff@3Fe71;<7[<)	8uF	;<)18E\TY<DY7fV'ZF1KT79)	8$8EF]0ff|1{4UN+;8$)18$%w')18Xm8E<>fi;
>$PMGMLK8~ { >$<DTC8GM8$f/8E\<F3A<)171GM71G'ffDGMDH>'ff@BAC'ffD8ED71F#GID79'71;'ffF98<F1F	GHffD8E\79'~ { <D\71;'ffF98
<F1F1GMHffD8E\79'F1KT79)18$8EF^0ff|	{4')u8<@BAP8X='ffD8v>$<DA<)171G71G'ffDt71;8UsS'ffGID79)18$8vGMDGMHffK)18#*`<2^GMD79'
>$PMGMLK8~&/<D\y71;8VF	KT79)18$8EFW09 Xff0&1 Xff09/<D\y0SV<FF	;'rfDuGMDyWGHffK)18V*`>r2fi4=z')	8$'r8$)EX<DYy<79'ff@
71;<7GIF+F1;<)18E\ZTY7fV'bF	KT79)18$8EF+0&Ee<D\z0&fi]@yKF97+TC8EP'ffDHB79'b>$PMGMLK8?~&4N;8$)18$%w')18X71;8U<79'ff@#F
'%71;GMFQ>$PMGMLK8e@3<8[<u8$)1YvH''&\>$<D\GM\<798?%w'):TC8EGMDHy71;8[F98$7?GMDv71;8eD798$)	F98E>71G'ffDV')1'ffPMPM<)	Yj
71;<7QGMF$Xff71;8?<79'ff@3F/'ffDbf;GM>fi;379'yA8$)	%(')	@d>$<F98?<D<PYF	GMF$4%mfV86<AAPYu71;8SD798$)fiF98E>71G'ffDV')1'ffPMPM<)	Y
fG71;t71;GMFy>	;'ffGM>8'%]X=fV8vfGMPMP/\8E>'ff@BAC'ffF98<F1YF9798E@>'ffDF18ELK8ED>8*w'ffD8bfGM71;)18EF1A8E>7y79'71;8
>'ff@BAC'ffD8ED71Fy'%0u2UGMD79'<DK@^T8$)^'%6>'ffDF18ELK8ED>8EFyF1'ff@B8'%+f;GM>fi;t<)	8bfGM71;)18EF1A8E>7y79'71;8
>'ff@BAC'ffD8ED71Fe<F1F1GHffD8E\z79'>$PMGMLK8]~X71;8y'71;8$)	Fe<)18^fG71;)18EF9AC8E>779'v71;8u>'ff@BAC'ffD8ED71Fe<F1F	GHffD8E\
79'F	KT79)18$8EF[09 XW0&1 X09B<D\0S4<>fi;'ffD8#'%:71;83)18EF1KP71GMDH>'ffDF98ELK8ED>8EF^GMF]fGM71;)18EF9AC8E>7
79'3<uF1@3<PMPM8$)VF9Y&F9798E@X<D\b71;8[\8E>'ff@BAC'ffF1G71G'ffDbA)1'&>8EF1F:>$<D>'ffD71GMDK8e)18E>$K)	F1GM8EPY#KD71GMPf/8e)18E<>fi;
TC'ffKD\<)	YU>'ffD\G71GM'ffDF$Xf;8$)18Q8E<>fi;#>'ffDF98ELK8ED>8+GIFWfG71;y)18EF9AC8E>7=79']71;8+>'ff@BAC'ffD8ED71F=<F1F1GMHffD8E\u79'
<]>$PMGMLK84QPMGMLK8Q>'ffDF98ELK8ED>8EF/>$<DBTC8+>'ff@BAK798E\B8E<F	GMPYU%w)1'ff@71;8+>'ffDF98ELK8ED>8EF'%C>'ff@BAC'ffD8ED71F
<F1F1GMHffD8E\79'Z71;8E@43')18#\8$71<GMPMFe'ffD71;GIFefGMPMPJTC8BHffG8EDGMD8E>71G'ffD4f;8$)18BfV83A)	'r&GM\8u71;8
AF98EK\'>'&\8e%w')<Dz<PH')fiG71;@T<F98E\Z'ffD71;GMF+\8E>'ff@BAC'ffF1G71G'ffDA)	'>8EF1FE4
 8+F1;<PMP>$PM'ffF98Q71;GMFWF98E>71G'ffDyTYU8&APM<GMDGIDH+f;YU71;8VA<)171GM71G'ffDuGMD\K>8E\^TYU<sS'ffGMD79)18$8:GMFTC8$79798$)
71;<Dt<Dt<)1TG79)	<)1Y'ffD84ZN+;8b<DF9fV8$)^GMF^F1GM@BAPM8[71;8#'A71GM@3GoE<71G'ffDt>)	G798$)	GM'ffD%(')y>'ffDF979)	K>71GMDH
s9'ffGMD79)	8$8EF+<79798E@BA71F:79'3@#GMDGM@3GMo$871;8[F1GMo$8?'%W>$PMGMLK8EF$4=N+;8$)18$%(')	8X71;8e'A71GM@3GoE<71GM'ffD>)	G798$)	G'ffDv%w')
>'ffDF979)fiK>71GMDHys9'ffGMD79)18$8EF[<79798E@BA71F^79'z@3GIDGM@3Go$8y71;83<79'ff@3F^'ffDf;GM>	;79'ZAC8$)1%w')	@>$<F98b<D<PY&F1GMF
f;8ED<AAPMYGMDH71;8SD798$)	F98E>71G'ffDV')1'ffPIPM<)1YX:71;8$)18$%w')18X<79798E@3A71GMDH79'@#GMDGM@3GMo$8Z71;8F	Go$8'%
71;8^)18EF1KP71GIDH#>'ffDF98ELK8ED>84?')e<b\8$71<GIP8E\mXF18EP%M>'ffD71<GMD8E\\GMF	>$KF1F1G'ffDZ'ffDz71;8y>'ffDF979)	K>71G'ffDz'%
s9'ffGMD79)	8$8EF$X71;8])18E<\8$)GMF:)18$%w8$)1)18E\Z79'*`_6K<DH#ace<)1fGM>fi;8XOgEhhiff2fi4
lI^WO`OytJyJElJ&Off
SDb<\\G71G'ffDB79'u>'ffDF979)	K>71GMDH^<+s9'ffGMD79)	8$86<D\v<^>'ff@3A'ffD8ED7V<F1F1GHffD@38ED7$Xf/8e@yKF97/>'ff@3AK798e>'ff@uR
AC'ffD8ED7>'ffDF98ELK8ED>8EF=TC8$%w')18:f/8+>$<D#>'ff@BAK798F1YF9798E@d>'ffDF98ELK8ED>8EF$4WSDuA<)171GM>$KPI<)EX%(')/<eHffG8ED
>'ff@BAC'ffD8ED7]\8EF1>)	GA71G'ffDt*`.fiB.	32XCf/8BD8$8E\79'>'ff@BAK798=r=
  *(m2%w')]8$8$)1YGIDF971<D71GM<71G'ffD
Z'%m71;8e<79'ff@3FQOb yff4=N+;<7VGMFEX%w')V8$8$)	Y3AC'ffF1F1GTPM8+F971<798?Z'%m71;8?>'ff@3A'ffD8ED7VAC')171F$X&Ob yffX
fV8u@yKF97]>'ff@BAK798B<D\F979')18u71;8BF979)1'ffDH8EF97[>'ffD>$PMKF	G'ffDmX+=r  *(l2fiXlf/8B>$<D\)	<Ef<TC'ffK7e71;8
;8E<P71;Z'%J71;<76>'ff@BAC'ffD8ED7$4
N+;GMFGMF6<>$>'ff@BAPMGIF1;8E\TY71;8u<PH')	GM71;@GIDzWGHffK)18ui3f6;GM>	;GMF?<b\GM)18E>76GM@3AP8E@B8ED71<71G'ffDZ'%
71;8zV'ff@BAC'ffD8ED7SRV'ffDF18ELK8ED>8N;8$')18E@GMD8E>71G'ffD4Mg4N+;8<PH')	G71;@<F	F1K@B8EFy71;<7B8E<>fi;
>$PM<KF18bGMD71;8>'ff@BAC'ffD8ED7y\8EF1>)	GMA71G'ffDt  GMFy\8E>'ff@BAC'ffF98E\GMD79'7fV'A<)171F$XW'ffD8v>'ffD71<GMDGMDH
$

fi+r[M

C1

ABD

ABD

AD

C2

ACD

ACD

CD

C3

 &:mVl

 OJ(S  
 }WOJ(S   

CDE

CDE

 Q
&
 W(M 
 WW(M 


r


&Q
   lJ(( 
   lJ(( 


 

	 
fffi 	 
!fffi#"$%'&()!*'+#,e-r.	 
!fffi/012)3

465879;:<>=@?BABCEDF;<HG8<)IJD)KMLBN0O5PCQD0:<)<>IRO:DF;<HS0D0:T9U D9;:T<WV%S0XYS0D0<WZ[V;<WSU :T58\]D58OC^OI(465879;:<H_@`ABC%DF;<
:T587FQD)K(DF;<aSLZb<cN0O5PCQD0:<)<^d58DFeS0<)\]S0<)DSbSTF;O.dCfOCe<WLU'FgL!:TU!`ehiF;<jDL!k]G8<aSF;OdSlDF;<
U OZb\mOC;<WCDnV;<WSU :T58\]D58OCS)K;olpqKDFL!DL!:<rLSTS587C;<WVaD0OsU)GP5Pt@9;<vu@pq`
OCG8XlLSS9]ZwL!k]G8<WS)KQxzy{K@LCV|LCODF;<):2U OCQDL5PC5PC7rOCG8XlC;OC@}QLSST9ZwL!k]G8<WSWKxz~`6qD(:<)D9;:'CS(LC|L!:T:TLWX
dF;OS<5PC]V5PU <WS|U O:T:<WS0\mOCVD0Oe5CS0DLCQD5PL!D58OCSsOIrDF;<L!D0OZwSa{g#cLCVdF;OS0<<WCQD0:T58<WS^L!:<
U OZb\mOC;<WCQDU OCS0<Wt@9;<WCU <WSW`
2G8<WLS0<HCOD0<>DFL!Dvd2<c9S0<>5CD0<)7<):TSnD0O|:T<)\:<WS0<WCQDn5PC]S0DLCD5L!D58OCS)K]L|D0<WUTFC]5PtQ9<rDFL!Dvd2<cV;<)DL5PG
5PCen\\m<WCV5v`ehiF5PScL!\\m<WCV5\]:O.Y5PV;<WSlDd2O<)XfIR9]CU D58OCS)KOC;<^IJO:|U OZw\]9;D5PC;7L9C5tQ9;<
5PCV< %IJO:{<WLU'F5PC]S0DLCD5L!D58OCLCVLC;ODF;<):rIRO:{7<WC;<):TL!D5C;7aLGPG5PCS0DLCQD5PL!D58OC]SnOILj758<WCS0<)D{OI
L!D0OZwS)`hiF;<WS0<{I9CU D5POCSL!:<r9S0<WV%5PC^DF;<r\]S<W9V;OYU O@V;<BOI6465879;:<>@`
hiF<rS0O9CVC<WSSOIzDF<>LG87O:T58DF]Z5PCa465879;:<>b5S758<WCEkm<WG8Odr?
c-@]#@-;B!'0!>m)-z'T!n;bJ|Y0{r RnR;z !R8!J@n0'
  
mzW-z JM!;#6
 J
y
)!c  |R;]!  0 %#c !sRHT!;!!RQ%JQl0
4 5879;:T<cc\:O@5V;<WSiLwV;<)DL5G8<WVa< ;LZb\]G8<>STF;O.d5C;7wF;O.dDF;<>LG87O:'58DFZOI465879;:<cb5PSi9S<WVaD0O
6
U OZb\]9D0<>DF;<cU OCS0<Wt@9;<WCU <WSnOI(Ls5PC;\9;DiO:07L!D0<`vhiF;<>C@9ZHkM<):OI(U OZb\]9;D0<WVU OCS0<Wt@9;<WCU <WSv5PC
DF5PSv< ;LZb\]G8<l5PSv<W587FQD)KdF5PU'F5SB!zWKS5CU <HDF<lU OZw\MOC<WCD{FLSBDd2OE5PC\]9;DSLC]VOC<cO9D0\]9;D)`
 J K5PCDF5PSB< ;LZb\]GP<l5SB<WtQ95P#LG8<WCQD{D0OE<W58DF<): '] O:
LU'FU OZb\mOC;<WCQDrU OCS0<Wt@9;<WCU <K !;.y
'.

fi].TB]'Pv]T8Q;Q]Q;;0MT;B'@;8;P]

nQEM'JanQazQ!YBnQ;!	

  Mfifffifi!"#$"%'& 
)(+*,($-,./10324 56)+68796: -;. 9"#:$<8=>96fi"%+?&A@B ( @C /<DE4 !$
@BF"#6GH8=9I?JLK#"M$!+68KN6fi9O@CP"#H6Q:!8=RSK#"%!+68KN 0T24 U968"#U&V@B ( @C / $!$!+W 4 U"NAXZY91$"%
8=HK#"M$!+68KN<"#F@ BF[ @ C 0
\{Tmfiff]^6fi+6`_ DE4 G"#9"NU6fi?a (b!b!b!($cd e$d fghPi 68j DE4 :Q!K#!!$6fiQU"#^68lkGkQmTJ
n +68 4>0
Io#pM>.>pff

Y]2;@qY]Tjq]]@
a ifi0 =rfiEsfi_tu"# ]]Y; 8]T]Y;P] & 
 [uv *;w)/ 
a c0 M''# &xt /
ay 0
zL{E8| & 
 ['v *;w`/
afi} 0
Y]Tjq]]@ .G~ zrr{	 ] ]] & /
a 0
=rE!sfi_j68"#O&A@ B ( @ C / "% - .
   xFx9 x 1L    )   t w
a 0
DE4 ! Q3 &A@BFt /  vr,!%)	! @B  x +    1L  U
a	 0
]] 8# & @]'9q]@ . ~ zxL($@; ]P0]Q;P] V& @C /:/
a 0 ;YYQ &xt /
a 0 $Y9 Y]]'9q]@ .
@; ]P0]Q;P] &V /
a i03  x {	  ]] & /
a c0 =rE!s!$_K%"%$6fiK&V (:/ "%F
afiy 0 ]] 8# &   x (q	 #YY] ]] & (	//
a8} 0 $$Y$   x
xW!Q;r!x>`FWrWu`FHW8jO`>18W8>`88
oH )H8  AWW)>)WA>1jr	x]	1ufilrO`Tr118jrPW
`8`1  8>8xoW1Z	1
 >OVAxfiAWW)8Wfi;]>	?`FTWr>`FHW89?`>18W8>`8?rE`HW89A>r
W>  )oU`FHW8jOH)  WorOrr>8	OrW>  )oE)r>8OrPx  8`!x>r3
lTWL'Z  ;rL + H<>< H<)>UT Vu  
 !
 	 +  	^9Z	) 	   A^ff	 +   l   
 
 	1V^fi ff
 W )!)V?uxWF>j>  ),r>TWl1 `FHW8jurFur?8W>3Q`FWrW
`FHW8j`>18W8>`8^)  u`>  )!  1'`>1jAFx8>A`FTx`Wx 
8Tx)9WWT  	118FT?1urTru"!)O>;>  )?rWWEH)?`u>89)$#?8	Or ur 
>	'`u>89u	!`>`)>>O`T11!>`u  W)  Wu1!r`"`81H  1Tr)
`FHW8jr W% 118P WP`WFTxoWu&  >1 x)   :rWTW   Z	1
i i

fi')(*&+,.-0/fi1

24305fi687:9
;=<?>A@
2?BC@
2?DE9FDHGJI K.3EL5fiMN2?3DIPOQ2M%9FB
RTSVUfiK.BXWVK.Y.YZ;C9FD5fi@9[MCUE9\@<Q6=LY.9]K"M_^`<?>a@<Q6=Lb5EMCK.3EO
@<Q6=Lc<Q3E9F3MV@<Q3fiB%9Fd05E9F3fi@9FBV>;e<Q6gfihkj&lGm0nZM%<ofhkjnqpb2iBCK"OQ3fiK"rb@
2?3MsK.6iLfi;C<&t?9F6i9F3M
Rvu%u
wyx.zg{8|:}~Jcy
&}{X|bFyQ0
 K.t?9F3[MCUfi2M)WZ9Ufi2&t?9
I@<Q3B%M%;e5fi@M%9FD2<QK3M%;C9
9?p
I@qUE<QB%9F32i@<Q6=Lc<Q3E9F3MV2?BCBCK"OQ36=9F3M
p
I@<Q6iL5EM%9FD\@<Q6=Lc<Q3E9F3MV@<Q3fiBC9Fd5E9F3@9FB
p
WZ92;C9V3fi<&W;e9F2?DE^NM%<8@<Q6=L5fiM%9B%^B%M%9F6@<Q3B%9Fd5fi9F3fi@9FB
R$Y.YEWZ9V3E9
9FDKB$M%<2LfiLbY"^8MCUfi9V3M%9
;eBC9F@MCK"<Q3
 <?;C<QYY.2;C^\BC5fi@
@9FBeBCK"t?9FY"^5fi3MCKYWZ9=DE9F@<Q6=Lc<QB%9NMCUE9=B%^B%M%9F6@<Q3fiB%9Fd05E9F3fi@9=K.3M%<[2o305fi687c9
;<?>Z@<Q6NI
Lc<Q3E9F3M@<Q3B%9Fd5fi9F3fi@9FBWVUfiK.@qU@
2?37:9ABCK.6iLY"^iY"<0<??9FDI 5EL>;C<Q6MCUE9a2;C;e2F^BsMCUfi2Ms2;C9a@<Q6=Lb5EM%9FD7^
MCUE92?Y.O?<?;eK"MCUfi6<?>K"OQ5E;C90R
S<2LLY"^MCUE93M%9
;eB%9F@MCK.<Q3  <?;C<QY.Y.2;C^?sWZ93E9
9FD2LK.t?<?M@
Y.K.d05E9WVUfiK.@qUK.BOQK"t?9F32?BK.3EL5EM
M%<oMCUE9X2?Y.O?<?;eK"MCUfi6gK.3K"OQ5E;e9X0RSVUE982?Y"O?<?;qK"MCUfi6U2?BVM_W<[6i2?K.3>53fi@MCK"<Q3fiB
<Q3E98><?;A@<Q6=L5EMCK.3fiO2
@<Q3fiB%9Fd05E9F3fi@9sWK"MCUN;C9FB%Lc9F@MM%<MCUE9s@<Q6=Lc<Q3E9F3MCB$2?BCBCK.OQ3E9FDNM%<2a@
Y.K.d05E9s2?3fiD=2?3E<?MCUE9
;><?;@<Q6=Lb5EMCK.3EO
2[@<Q3fiB%9Fd05E9F3fi@9=WK"MCU;C9FB%Lc9F@MAM%<[MCUE9i@<Q6=Lc<Q3E9F3MCBa2?BCBCK"OQ3E9FDM%<\2[Be5E7fiM%;C9
9?RXy9
M5fiBA@<Q3fiBCKDE9
;aMCUE9
>5fi3fi@MCK"<Q3><?;V@<Q6=L5fiMCK.3EOi@
Y.K.d05E9a@<Q3fiB%9Fd05E9F3fi@9FB)r;eB%M

 0 }}gbyy :Fbyfib hPn[q C ?PX=i oQ ?   eC P    fi
P  Q C P?   b   q      X   
  =e
   P  &
  hkbfi  n   
N   8 k  8?q :
   
:  Xqq ?:e PoF 
     b
 b)  b%  &  %aq    q?k      ?P?8X  
 
 0%
S)UfiKBy>5fi3fi@MCK"<Q3XK.BBCK.6=LY.9?pK.MDfiK.;C9F@MCY"^2LfiLYK"9FByMCUE99F@<Q6=Lc<QBCK"MCK"<Q3XMCUE9
<?;e9F6M%<aDE9F@<Q6iL:<QBC92@
Y.K.d05E9
@<Q3fiB%9Fd05E9F3fi@9K3M%<=MCUE9@<Q3%5fi3@MCK"<Q3o<?>@<Q6=Lc<Q3E9F3M)@<Q3fiB%9Fd05E9F3fi@9FB8hWVUfiK.@qU[2;C9aLfi;C<Jt0K.Dfi9FDo2?BVK.3EL5EM
M%<iMCUE982?Y"O?<?;eK"MCUfi6onqR
S)Ufi9B%9F@<Q3D>5fi3@MCK"<Q3<?>MCUE9a2?Y"O?<?;eK"MCU6@<Q6=Lb5EM%9FBs2N@<Q3fiB%9Fd05E9F3fi@9AWVK"MCU;C9FB%Lc9F@MM%<NMCUE9a@<Q6NI
Lc<Q3E9F3MCB)2?BCBCK"OQ3fi9FDM%<2=BC5E7M%;C9
9  
 0}}4Fb:fi c
:yyb h?&nq e ?P?8 A? %   qC P[ 
  P  ? e PN? V  b  E qc      N 
    XC
   $P   
   hkb  n   
N  8 k   e?VE :    
 
:k  Ne Q:C P
 
 a    F q    b
 boa E b%  Fk  a    ? k  T    ?PX    
 e Q
S)UfiKB>5fi3@MCK"<Q3[K.Bs6=<?;C98K.3t?<QY.t?9FD\BCK.3fi@9aK"M)@
2?YY.B byy :Fbyfib 2?3D\K"MCB%9FY">;C9F@
5E;eBeK"t?9FY"^?R
 <?M%9MCUfi2MMCUE9o;C9FBC5Y"MCB;C9
MC5fi;e3E9FD470^MCUfiK.B>53fi@MCK"<Q342;C9@
2?@eUfi9FDBeK.3fi@9MCUfi9>5fi3fi@MCK"<Q3`6i2F^47c9
@
2?Y.Y"9FD6=<?;e9MCU2?3<Q3fi@9AWVK"MCUoMCUE9aBC2?6=9a2;COQ5fi6i9F3MCB)2?3DMCUfi9ABe2?6=9aK.3fiB%MC2?3MCK.2MCK"<Q3o<?>BC9
LB%9
M?Rvu


	fiff	fi "!#$!#%'&(ff$!#")!*+-,.%'	fi/ff	fi	0%124335,%76
8:9-ff	;!=<5>ff	fi,
!#?	fiff#@!#")!*!#
,/	fi/#%13!#%1	4BAC!#/	fiED)FG%13ff.!=9?35H!#	=,.-B!4	fi"B#>B	fi	fiff9IB<J1	
)D(+K%1	L%1	<5/ff	fi=!#	#9?M%1	;!H!#%'B!#%1?BAN$	fi3	fi/!LO
9IP-B335)B	L3"Bfi!QBA9IHPE%'	;!H!#%'B!#%1	BAJ1%'&(ff
R 





STU

fiVXWQYZ[.\ ]-^_BZNYX`bac^LdQeW_af_
gQ_BahedjilknmlgQolkngLmnZYL\iNp+_BknZqr`bZN_osmnaht5knafWeQ_

uwvyx4zl{"|~}n"*uw""BC|"l=.l.5

"NN/N"

+fi'/4#011='I?5H4/fi/#1#1Ns)E#-H#
 -4 .BQ?)G1=fiGB#$= #



 1#7#

"N=N5





#H1#/#$c1'=1?#.#fiHB#1b*

l.l."



5
  ~5

)5

"$f>/ )fI f
#CHC0#)5-#lM
"0fEfi )f
)sHC0#)5-#lM
50f?# f
/)CC$#5#sM




= #@b'fi>'=#.#fiH#
B0"74L/Bfi"@/H111fifiI'/*B"I#@#/
(B11I7bBfifiI1*111 "l=.l.5 "NN/N" b#14?5H*fi #'.#1b#/#.#
#*c11=1Bfic#;=+1? 
'/

l.l." 

 n   



and









and

h 






or





(okY,0)







and

5





or






(okY,0)

5



and



or

or







(okY,0)



(okY,0)



5



and



or





(okY,0)







5


and




w

h 

w

h 


and



and





h 

$hL)~l--n)fnL(sn(n(I5$55#"wffnQn)
	~5fiffLQn



fifi

!#"$&%('*)+-,*.&/fi0fi12)435$6!7",(1398:'(35,(;391

< ,*%('*)=
>&?A@CBEDFBHGIBHJCKLNMCOQPSRETVUWPETXRSY4ZOS[\O]PEY2^_Z\YOEURE`baXPS`dcefif
>Fg*LNMhei`deVO]PHMhe5PS`jMkPE`bclecm(OSc^CYnMkPEc^oOqpsrt@Cf
>vuoLNMxw]c`deyPSREY2YzmcR{OS[\O]PEY2^_O]PERSTVUPSTXREYG|f
~}xV}*fiX:fi }*
>
LNMU2c^CaceXYelPMlOSOS`deX^CY2e5PmcR?GIBEu#Kf
~}*2V*fiX*
>
L7MiUc^CaceXYe5P7UceOQY4lTVY2eVU2YCMRSRHM[imcR7YMUHUcl^CacleXY2e5P#Ucl^CaXT\PSY4Z
TOQ`deXCPSVYMblcRE`PEX^`dev*`dTVRSYnXf
>yXLNMeyMRSV`PEREMRS[U2bTVOQPSYRq`beyPEXYPSREY2Ynu?aX`dcP{UdTVO]PEY2RWKW
o'*)2%'*)=q
y ) 

evx*>lREMaXcklY2RqMOEOQTV^CMXdYOqDF

/fi)2k'*;)'*k351l=

XclRqYMUHyeXY`bl5cRE`deXU2bTO]PEY2RHOn?XXBQ\hK`dePSXYw]cl`beyPSREY2YnuL

>iMCOSY2aVOSYPq 4n
>iMVMlOQyPHMhXdY


 YCY[\Ochm
X
Y[
@

fi*2

 {
:*

5l

  fXMeVZ
5l


7 X`jUHyU2ce5PEM`beVOqx*>RHMhaXyeXc\Z\YO

MhREYVB22BEV lSk9

:*

l*5

49  `dOzPEXYoY2dY2^CY2e5PVM9`deX

 MlOM

1435'(("fi;"fi(3=
(:X

~}*VX

XlMlZXZyUdTVO]PEY2Rq\  MlOqMCeXY2`d9cRchm(X
(X5
lX
?-g~K
fi::X ~}V*fiX
?  BQ  K
V
fiV::X

~}*VX
?XSB]5K
fi*\
V 
?K
:* l*5 
fi
PSVY2eiRSY2PSTXREey
Xl( 
  f\`bm 
fi9 }* }*
lX7j 
?-K
XfiX~\: *5::j\:}*
V*mclRqY2lY2RE[&`be
?  KZ\c
*42X5
h
?AK
9 *fi }*
lX
h2 
?K
 fi5
l*fi ~}*2V*fiX*
?Nh2B
?  KSK
V
5\
mcRqY2lY2RE[oeXY2`d9cRE`beVU2bTVOQPSYRqVcm   XYRSY
  \
Z c
* fi5
fi::X ~}V*fiX
V
?2Nk2B
?V9B]  SK K
 fi5
V
?-7jBlNk2\K
:\:~fiV
V
?-(K
fi*2 5l
l
  A 7jfXREYPETXREei7j

l*:X

~}V*fiX
?XK
fi9 fi }*
VNk 
?-K
<
~}*V}*fiXfi: }
5\(mcRqYYRS[U2c^CacleXY2e5P_?  `bPSi`deXaXT\PHO 
K `de
?  KZ\c
* fil
~}V*fiXV   fi*\ <N
lX
?NkB
?
#K  K

VREYPSTVRSeNk2

X:\\\2fi\7Xv:A:vFW~WWh
h

Xfi


:hX\hFWWh

Wk99X

fi	ff
fififf

465879

:;'<=:><7-?@BA;

:><:;G#5+X^IN/C?E79
XC<hM;oG#5
q

FAHG#7HF#I)IJ?EKL9

F#A7_?Y`2MFa<G#5

MONPCIQRA;

7cbd;)efA;+?gX?E5

KG#5+Xg<]K

9

5

:YAG#I5ou>vxw/y/z{

?79

V

A-C?>? 

Z\];+?o:><FaFdA-Iu>vxw/y/z{
C?>A9+C"5pA;+?7-en7-A-?EQ:YI5

{

{

INA;

?S:><:;+?TG#5

?>C<hA-?EKi:YI5

|W}[~cu>{xv[{

G#7B?Y`2A-?E5

|W}[~cu>{xv[{

7?Ej)9+?E5:Y?Z\];

7-A-?E<KUINVW?EG#5+XTC?E:YIQDM9+A-?EK[ZS\];

7?Ej)9+?E5:Y?d;

<7kA;+?dNlICQmIN<HK

G#7

G#C?E:YA-?EKS<:Yen:>F#G#:

~B|{@2I5+?:><5ff:YIQDM9+A-?A;+?7-en7-A-?EQ:YI57-?Ej)9

K

?EKA-C?>?gbG#F#FVW?5+IA;

_GX9+C?fD:YI5)A<G#5

:Y?E7^:YIQDM9

:YIQDMWI7<hVF#?^5+?>X<hAGI5o5

x22

7-?Ej29+?E5

|/}x~BuE{[vx{

~B|{

:Y?

?E5

AxA;+?ICGXGa5

|W}[~BuE{xv[{

<F>-IG#5)A-C?>?

~B|{bdG#FaFA;+?E5

ln-ffkPlhff>"POY

^WY

:Y?NPICH<iXGr?E5OIV7?>Cr<hAG#I5O<5KO7A-C9

?^:YIQDM9+A-?EKs:YI57-?Ej)9
?E5

XV9

7d<K+?>A<G#F?EKs?Y`n<QDMF?^7;+IbdG#5+XS;+IbA;+?f<FXICGA;

X?E5+?>C<hA-?S<T7-en7-A-?EQR:YI5

?:YI57-?Ej)9

G#5

~B|{I5F#G#5+?ffLINfu>cuEy/{

tn"l)=iEY>"_YslE2P>8kh

<hA]A;

?E5

Ga7Ga7]7-A<hA-?EKoQSIC?^?Y`nMF#G#:>GAF#eSV)eTA;+?HNPIF#FIbdG#5+XA;+?>IC?EQs

uY_uEy/{

x22x+^nEth

\];

-&./(+01",2*+3(+#
!

QiQe%:>F#G#j29+?_n]]<7x<g5+?EGX;)VWICA-I]A;+?MGrIA[:>F#G#j29+?_+_A-I]X?E5+?>C<hA-?<5H?Y`2A-?E5K+?EK

-IG#5A-C?>?tZc\];

IA-?A;

*+fi

7-A-?E<KpINk<DA-C?>?Z

G#r?E5sA;+?^Nt9

V2e%<K

?DC?E79

!
"#%$!'&)(+*)$,)(+$

:Y?fG#5pA;G#7?Y`n<QSMF?^G#7?Ej29

QG#5s_GX9+C?DG#7]9

Grh<F?E5)AgA-IT

A-?EKUV)eOA;+?D<FXICGA;QRG#5UcG#X9+C?ST<hC?DX9

ICQS<FWNPICQ<7]FI5

XS<7d:YIQDMWI5+?E5)Ad:YI5

7-?Ej29+?E5

)m"28i 8>d+h/Y+>>Y

d+Y>i%dPnS>YYS>tn/8>oPnd"ntt

7?EK=A-I

:YA9+C?EKO7-en7-A-?EQRK+?E7:YC"GM
h

Z

<hC<5)A-?>?EKLA-I=VW?DG#5UK+?Y

:Y?E7<hC?^G#5pA;

|W}x~Bu>{xv[{

u>cuEy/{



>

AGI5Z

<hAdNlICQsZ

~c|{/u" 

|/}x~BuE{[vx{

~B|{

lffPY
klPiP

hn>Y#%

IA-?A;<hAA;+?:YI5
X9

7-?Ej29+?E5

<hC<5)A-?>?EKUA-ITV/?G#5oK

:><5o7G#QDMFeiA-C<5

:Y?E7H:YIQSM9+A-?EKffV)eO|W}Bd/}[~[{~xy

|W}x~Bu>{/[v[{~B|{sG#5o_GX9

?E:YIQDMWI7<hVF?%Z/Ib?>r?>CE@A;+?>eo<hC?fX9

7-NPICQA;+?EQG#5A-IS%<5

K@

C?T<hC?5+IA

<hC"<5A-?>?EKUA-ITVW?fG#5UZ/8?

;+?E5:Y?@G#5)A-ISK+?E:YIQDMWI7<hVF?^%%Z

_STx+Exx_	n
8?f5

IbA9+C"5pA-ISA;+?K

x22

Ga7:>9

77G#I5IN_:YIQDM9

A<hAGI5

u>cuEy/{

kh+t>iPnTh htP

<F[:YIQDMF?Y`nG#Ae/

|W}[~cu>{xv[{

~B|{

P8n-xntPSTh/

+"D"h#ff
tt=6Plfh hPP)l

fi







_n>-



)YYp>tE^PUPnYlt

\];+?^:YIQSMF?Y`+GAepG#7A;+?E5sFaG#5+?E<hC]G#5pA;+?f5)9





:>F#G#j29+?Zd\d;+?7G%!>?INkA;+?QS<`+G#QS<Fx:>FaG#j)9
 %?E:";A-?>CE@)*E

:YIQDM9

A<hAGI5

7-en7-A-?EQ

7-A-C9

QfVW?>CgINc:>FaG#j)9

:><7-?E7<hC?K

?G#5o79

?E7>@+V9+A?Y`nM/I5

?E5AG#<FxG#5pA;+?EGC]7G"!>?E7>Z

K7-?EF?E:YAcA;+?A-C?>?g1bdGA;A;+?7QS<F#F?E7-AcQS<`+G#QS<F

:;O<iA-C?>?QSGa5)9

7dI5+?G#7]Jn5+Ib5ff<7%A;+?fbdG#K+A;'&)(

%?E:";A-?>C.-0/c?E<hCF@1*E  Z8\];+?>IC?EQ2**Ga7A;+?E57<e2G#5

<Fd:YIQSMF?Y`+GAe
,+ INH<':YI5
:YA9+C?4#Z659+AA;





I57G#K+?>Cc<F#F>-IG#5)A-C?>?E7BIN<dXG#r?E5fXC"<hM;$#@<5

IN]XC<hM;#



7?Ej)9+?E5:Y?ffG#7D?Y`nMWI5+?E5)AG#<F]G#5A;

G#7:YIQSMF?Y`+GAeDC?E79

?obdG#K

FAG#7kNPICA;+?]bIC7-A:><7?87

G:9W?>C?E5)A>Z

;<=

XoA;

<hAA;+?

A;3&)(pINHA;+?oXGr?E5
A;+?]VW?E7-A<5

K<Er?>C<hX?

fi>8?@BADC"E,FHG

E,hji c GlkjmHGiE,G

IKJMLNHOPRQTSVUXW,YIKS[Z\W\]_^"`abPdcffebcfff Gg

npoBq\rs:tuwvxzyu|{}os~qxvzuuqltwoB,oBquqxrzrzsBquwqxs~uwqsqjsBlvzunpoqlrzstuv:rzoxzyu1"o~o_|sq
ffo\oquwqxffoqlruuwqlwu1vvr


|
B



ns~q






~}}~
:["T"}
%
%
:["T"}


cffebcfff Gg


|BB
BB
B
B

B











}[z}}[~
%
:[\V}
:[\V}
:[\V}
:[\V}
%
%
%





BB1B
1B
B8B
1B
BB1
B1
B8
8












~}}
%
%
%
:[V}
:[V}
:[V}
:[V}
%

|s~xzyxyuoBlrzuwv__xzsoBqRBr4[8VBqltxyus~ox1fflrxzuwv

Ehji c GlkmGiE,G

Br\_puuffx6xzyu"o~o_|sqffoBq\ruluwqlwu)Vs~qtuffo),orl~uquw_xs~oqqovzB\"ovzDff

observation:  1 = {(A,1), (E,1)}
consequence: not okX or not okZ

or1

and

and
true

or2

and

true

true

and

and

true

or5

and
true

true (okY,0)

and

and

and

and

and or3

and or4

and or6

and or7

true

(okX,0)

and

or2

true

and
true

or5

(okY,0)

true

(okX,0)

and

true

true

and

and

and

and

and

and

and

true

(okZ,0)

(okZ,0)

(okZ,0)

 yuXvurzxs~qlwoBqlrzuuqlffuXwBq,urzs~s\utrsBqs~\qxz'q\t'uBrzs~BquXxovzus~uKxysr
rzs~s,w_xs~oqs:rxzoXlrzuqoBxs~swut.uwvrsoBqo ?jE\FC%

sq\uqlts~|ys:y\uv"ovzrxzylu

quffurrvDrs~s~\_xzsoBq\r|Br6s~xBttr|ys:tKxoqotuB

      #

! 
%$&

"	  
fiff


6%ffK,44%ff"ff""_ff%%%ffH
H 8,H

b_w D  6"ff1H ,H_V"%ffff

ffHw"H$4%ff1H ,"H

wB

ffff4w_


M

H_"ff%wffff

fi')(*+-,.0/"123+4*)576819:(2%6;2=<236>:9@?BADCB<EBAD<CD+-*.?4FG23AD+-HI57+42%EJCD6>KLAD6;(:2
fiM NPORQTSU)V=WXUBY-Z#[\^]`_aUJbcDdDZfeg[Gha
i=j;n;jJjDkLul3mzn;oDpTDqqk`n;ortsDqvsDuu}kLlvvun>wyu`xLkLx{zDjqv;snBu|Dqvun;w}7~{u=~Lquolm"u}~Lsj~u7Ljuk-w}lvuw`>ukDLun>qm~{lvlvk-u|wu qvfisDk-uoDwuoB~{qvqn;k-~Lw}fioD kLqn;o#qvsqv~{squ=~{vn;fiu=u~{kLl
V
qvkLn;osDuqvusD~Ll3uf>pL~{kLkLqvl3n>k-n>vqvouslvwf~{qvn;n;Tn;k-ou~L ofik-n;ooDviuqvo4q}~Lqvo4nk-~LqvoDn;~{un;qvon;uk- oqvqsDlvukLuw`vn>~LuL;z"u=qvkLoDsDtk-uoJqvkLsDBu~Lvw}uvl3~ffw}D~{~{qvn;w}n>k->~Lou"j ;n;n;JDuL@iq` V~LoDoIkLqvsv-u l`j3n;souJ~qlvsju~Ln;w}j%suLuLz7zjqvqv~LsDsDuuu
~Lj;>n;pLJkLDl3un;qvs=wrtsmDn;kB|uj7~LoDokLGquTmDuufiuuoom)Bk-okLqvsDuulv vn;n>oDup#kLn;oDjun;-B#ukL|X~L~Lo>pLmkLl%n;n>=qvsk-wyo;V;n;oDu~{l7  n;o)fiqvsDu`oBwfiul=kL|vsDuj%lvs u
qk-~Lko;~{;nqoDk-u`w}-n;okLG qvsDuG4 qu wygGGql3jqvDlvu`n;~{lvlvu`uqvn;oD|l%n;qvo@;~LoB~sqv~n;3~{Ln;qu#oDup-mu> u^q~Lk-rjoqvs>n;=|k-w`oDuuou~Ljj3ouLs7zn;uqvmLsTu~{lvq7)@qvkLsDjlvk-uuoklvLuquvl3lz>jq|qqvusDkLmu}"~LkLoBo4lwoDkjfi~LmDu;ul 
kLqvsDuTj~LoB;;wqfikulkLGj~L; qfik4G fi}Gn;fiu7uD~Ljqvn;>;fifiqvsuu^uoBD~Lwjqvfi>ulqvskLuuoJmpLwutfiun;ol|kLqvsDu"j;n;k-Jn;DoBuqlvun;u^o~LqvosDm u
k-n;o4rtql3suuXuL ufiujqkLkLulv{~{qvn>k-ok-oTqvsDu"jk-w}Dqv~{qvn>k-o~LJjk-w`;u n>q0kLjk-ouJDuojunn;;ql3~{qum
n;jo)k-on;up-JDDlvuu#oxju|jskLlvn;j%lvsufimDuk-on;mjqvqk#k-qvsDDu^l=jk-k-;o>k|uJn;oDDpuokLju=ulv{n>~{qvqvsn>k-lvoufi ujqqkqvsDuvJquwn;o)n;p-DlvuTJ|rtsDu
G I#
G II# } ~Lom 
I
uJ ;D>n;uw#u~{on;l%jo>u}L~{zqvkLn;kLtoDpvulvk-n;fw`^~{~qvu`n;k-j33osDn;mDulvqun;=o)kLkLqlvqvk-sDkLoDu#lpLjoDuk-l=k omDqvsuu~LBzo)|ukLosjn;j3u#uslvkL{jt~{kLqvlvn>lvk-uovGk-g)omkL|lvuqkkoBLqujulk-lvuzovqvqvn;sDn;mDouup-l3v>nDoDp}uoDuuk-qDn;p-ul^skLzGjqv~LqvsD~Luun;^ojuk-mosDBuuo 
~{;Jun;jo~Lp  u@~LvkLui|qvson;~L;JmDvunfi u omuoju)k-oIkLulv{~{qvn>k-oz|qvsDulvuuoBqum~L>pLkLl3n;qvswgkLlpLuoDul%~{qvn;oDp
jsk-~oLuTuuJ Dfiuoul3jn>uu^ojun;m;qvmDskn;|Lk-uDlv)l3u";Lu;un;os~{uo"n;juT~{qv~{n>k-o;|n>umsDqvuslvn;uqvsDl3~Lu`w`u"qkLulvwqn=kvmqn;lv3k-joDlvp-uq>uukLLuoBulvqLuJmvTquw}u
 snqj3usw~{n;lvXuoDq0kLBqn;qjlv~Lk-;>op->ql3kLk-oDp-u>lvLukLmz rtul3sDLuukLmIl3uw7~{xLlvx=|n;n;Xj3sDuun;lvo}kmf~Luojn;ztmn;xoDLpLJztsxn;Lj%s`- kL ulvL{u~{oqvn>k-osDu"ok-qvsD;m u
fiu^w`ik-w`qkLlvlvuu^m~{l3l3~Lmw}noD~{p}qvn;jjk-uw`fiuDjqqv~{kLqvn;k-qvosD~Lu;>vLJ quwkLulv{~{qvn>k-ok-ojk-w`>uDn>qn;kLqv~Ln;oDumJjqqvn;oDp
k-lvuDmqpLk-jun;oqvpsDu|~{l3=j^kLkLqvkLsuup-lvn>LLuum@oo kJmDquu^wglvvk-ql3wjqvqvsDDu#lvu=~Loqm#uwnXn;v;ql3qjl3qv~{DqlvuuLm}nrto#si|n;7fiquuj%osmon8n;JtDu#zJqw#kLpL~uqvsD~Lujlqv~Ln>;qv>s
k-w`uuJfiul3n;w}uo4qv~Lfilvu3>qvqvs~{q3sDkn;qvuGujqvn;LuoDuv
MfiN Q"bfUBU  aZU   Zb YLZ bUJa
i"=u^on;qvw`~{lvfiqtkLlvqvn;~LqvoBsqn;fi~Lu>jlvn;u~L~LmDj~L~uqkLlvufiu qvsff uqvslvu~{vqtuo4n;qzDuk-m)o~L>>pLkLk-l3oDn>u^qvswomn;n>tlvu|jsDquumoqvsD~{qvuTsJuDvqn;uqvwfiqul%q0juqvuDolv
u ~LoB	qvqs"~{k q
ouD~Lk j3mDsu7j;n;noBD	u|jvk-uo4u}qv~Ln;on;p-XDk-lvou;xLx ~T oDk  omDuqvs~Lon;7mjn>~LqvuLz~{k-lvoDuu`oBqvj~Ln;oo ~L	 >~L~o m^jk-ovuq~Ll3j3sjqu~k-uq"n;oBjqk-lvuo4u}qv~Ln;no)o"k-sonj3>sk-oD~ u
 
!#"$&%#(')*%#+,$&*-&./$')$00#1$&23).45267809*':fi;6"<*2!6'<%#=0,$&>$&78!%#!#?6;A@B@BCD6EGF/*2>)
;!2!#H;I'KJML$NF/23(EG6O(OP($1Q3
RST

fiUWVYXZ\[^]_a`

observation:  = {(A,1), (E,1)}
1
consequence: not okX or not okZ

true

or2

and

true

true

and

and

and

and

true

observation:  2 = {(A,1), (B,1), (E,1)}
consequence: not okX or not okZ

or1

and

or5
true

true (okY,0)

true

true

and

or2

true

and
true

and

and

or5

and
true

(okY,0)

or2

and

true

true

or1

true

or5

true (okY,0)

and

and

and

and

and

and

and

and

and or3

and or4

and or6

and or7

and or3

and or4

and or6

and or7

true

(okX,0)

and

and

true

(okX,0)

and

and

and

true

true

(okX,0)

and

and

and

and

and

and

and

and

and

and

and

true

(okZ,0)

(okZ,0)

(okZ,0)

true

(okZ,0)

(okZ,0)

(okZ,0)

observation:  3 = {(A,1), (B,1), (C,1) (E,1)}
consequence: not okX

and

true

true

observation:  = {(A,1), (B,1), (C,1), (D,0), (E,1)}
4
consequence: not okX and not okY and not okZ

or1

and

or2

and
true

(okX,0)

and
true

and

or5

and
true

true (okY,0)

true (okY,0)

and

and

and

and or3

and or6

and or6

(okX,0)

and

(okX,0)

or5

(okX,0)

and

and

and

and

and

true

(okZ,0)

(okZ,0)

bBc^dfehgNikjmlDn5bhofeagIp1ofqari<sehi<qap1i<rIp1oHgNgNi<rtofqauYc^qhd)vokwxofeagyuac{zimgNi<qGv8oH|YrimgN},~,vNcMofqarm



or1

fiYf3&fi{aY^=Y&MGhGYGhahfa&hffihMHh^Y

B

C

A

BCE

D

E

D

E

AD

DEF

F

MfhNkH,fifiNh^mxmBN<&Y1NhNyMNa1m^<mfiNa&MfGm1HN&<faa^h
6f^GNmH
hDhH!kY,NN^ma,<fH5<H&hDhy^kNhID<&a1NaNII1faN&a1
m^^h8ya&
1fGNH^a+Nh=H^MHNa,W^m-kI5=Na<1fYh<18Nhm^^hI1H&N<faa^a\
yMNNaAm^^h<W1HN&<faa^hMNyh<MfGHmh<^^ka,N^hHGm^Ga<8Na,y,N)1fNHh<
^Na<MIh<^fH&mWh\&<NaMW^Wfa,&HGm<A=f^&mH+MfaNHA1fGNH^a=fif^GNm
HWNmN<&Y1NhNHHNamNH^^\fNa^
1fa&Y1NMfmHkfaa^#DYH&Gm<
 ahm&</YmfMMN</<HG
WamNmxH&HYyh<Nh
N<&Y1NhNA^IkNmHNh
N^AHYYH1K1fY^1DM3H-1fK
YhNh1fa<h<a1y,Ny1fh<GN^HDfaM)^KNhy&Mm8HfiHk^^HB<mHaIHNY^N<Na^mffh
NhfY^,<a
1fY&a1
NmD<&a1NaN<\ya<hmHmAfNN^YMHHNmHm<-<m^H
m,NK
Yy\1Dm&m^<Hf^^,NH
Hk^M<W^Na&&Y1NhN<mWhH=1hHYMHfh
&hfa^
Dh<>^aYh+f,<IHImHNmHa<myH>hYh8f,<Iyh<hmHmIfNNMY^H3Nm)D<
&Y1NhNk^\aH\fNNMY^HfhNhfY^,<a
<hf^hmm
Nha1NhNkH\ka^kMm
NhA&MmHBm^Ga<8^MNW1HN&<faa^hyf^&m<m
 MNhfhfNmkN<N&a1NhN<fi,Nk1fkYhN,NMfaHM<HHafD#Nm&a1NaN<fi,NkhH
h<1<N&,&^Ma,&5=a,NHI<m
<HHf!H1mIM^fNNMY^HaNH^^^h<,
1fY^1DM3mH<MNhN<&Y1NhN^AhHA&mH+faN^hmAxH
1DHMk#YM\HYhm&
ya&,N1fa&Y1<xHmH&mHa^ha^BHahm&<AWh<Haam&fia<HafD#Nm&a1NaN<m
YhMNay^5a,NHI<m<HHfNa,NhmaH5f^GNm<ya^H&^^h<,M
^NaAGYAm8HYMN8WhmNmHNHaNh
1fa<h<a1<=1HNN<faahKkNh<)N<k8HN
^^a<,&M^NaAGYAm8HBYMN8
)H	ff
fiff	
6 Na^<1NMf/5aN<<GkmNhD xH1D&H1N^aNhk^Y^kH5Y^,fhf<ka,&H1m&^m<
 1fY<Ga<a1H!Y,NNma^,<M8Nh1fa<h<a1^)^h<1ffN,YM=Ha M8Nh
k^Y^kH^M31&MmMfN,N^ Y<AfkkH<hm&H1faaMN^fam/NhHMHH&MNa NaH^a&<<
y^^
1D&H1Ika^kHa^,fhfN<W^N^k\^^h<,8^Nh
NMmHNh\1fa<h<a1H
N,N!
 & NN,N^hNaN<aMN<1faYMNMfafk^Y^kH^M31&^m&Mf Ha Nh<
^GNDaa1+NhyHMHHMNa y^NfW1hHYM<<
 aH^M
N,yNhIHMHH&MNa H&kHMHfaNH
MNWNfaaah<&mhHaMN8^h<,W1fYhN,N^faH/1fY^1DM3H
"$#&%

fi')(*&+-,/.1032

457698;:=<?>!@ACBD>FEG:=B<
HJILKNM3O/KNOQPRTSQUVW!O/I3OXW!YSLZ3OXY\[I^]_ RT_`Y\aNRbKNc^]_ RdZ3O/Y\[I3]_ RT_Cec3O/f$cgY\ahRbfi]I_NO/Z^R?aNRTZgWj]_ K`kSXYM3_NOQlS/RmnoI^R
W!Y&Ugc3Y&PRW!YIpUgOXI3_ KNYIpKNO/Y\KNOQ]I3_C]qrY_N_NM3W!Y\l=SQRT_CKNc3Y\K	Y\aNR)fi]I3_NOX_ K RTILKseOQKNcgKNc^R)_ Ut_ K RTWuZ^RT_Nfia$OQk3KNOQ]I
YI3Zv]l_ R?ahPY\KNOQ]IwV	lM^Kg]I3SQUxYyqGR?ez]qKNc^RT_NR{W|YTUvlR{fi]I3_NOXZ^R?aNRTZ}Wj]_ K~kS/YM_NOQlSQRmfi]W|Wj]I
W!O/IO/W!YS/OQKUgfia$OQK R?ahOQ]IO/_KNc3R]I^RlY_ RTZ]I{Z3O/Y\[I^]_hO/_f?Y\ahZO/I3YS/OQKUms)c3Y\KOX_?VpeRo_NO/WjkS/Ugfi]M3IpKbKNc^R
I1M3WlrR?as]qwd\SXOQK R?ahYS/_sO/I~Y-ZO/Y\[I^]_NO/_df?Y\ahZO/I3YS/OQKU]qrYZ3O/Y\[I^]_hO/_$YI3Zjfi]I3_NOXZ^R?asKNc^R)Z3O/Y\[I3]_ RT_
eOQKNcW|O/I3O/W!YSrf?Y\ahZO/I3YS/OQKU!K ]|lrRoKNc^RW!]_ K)kS/YM_NOQlSQRm
RYZ^]k3K	KNc^RP1O/R?eKNc3Y\K	RTYf$cZO/Y\[I^]_NO/_scY_Y-fi]_ K?VtYI3ZW!O/I3O/W|YS1ZO/Y\[I^]_ RT_	Y\ahRKNc^]_ ReOQKNc
YW|O/I3O/W!YSsfi]_NK?m]aNR?]FPR?aTVseRY_N_NMWjR!KNc3Y\KgKNc^R|fi]_ Kg]q)YZ3OXY\[I^]_NO/_-OX_-]l3KNYO/I3RTZl1UYZZ3O/I^[
M^kyKNc^R~fi]_ KN_o]qOQKN_S/OQK R?a$YS/_?mo)c3O/_O/_YSXSf?Y\k3KNM3aNRTZylpUKNc3RgqG]S/SQ]FeO/I^[I^]KNOQ]Iy]qY{fi]_ KoqGMI3fiKNOQ]IV
ec3OXfhcY_N_NO/[I3_)fi]_ KN_K ]|S/OQK R?ahYSX_dYI3ZO/I3_ KNYIpKNO/Y\KNOQ]I_?m
p BCE>FEG:=B61 i=t  7\ -F=/~7$$gJ`tiN
 X|?T ;\gh
 u;!T?bJ  G$
 {?\${$^?J7\ffG7\\`L  {?XGgGtiQ\sGp;= $^??
L   \~~^dh?  7G\d\=|1~~Fi i/i|i=b 
1o \g\=~jGiGti-})\s}~?\?\|gt37?) 
p -})Gj\=jd 
 !$~h  i \wG{  iG	`tiN!h  G?JC\-G-L7\y1  ) 
)c^RqM3I3fiKNO/]IO/_bRi1K RTIZ^RTZK ]|O/I_ KNYILKNOXY\KNOQ]I3_)Y_dqG]S/SQ]Fe_?
7`??{/^s7i??/3$
)c^Rjfi]I3ZOQKNOQ]I3_eR!O/Wjkr]_ Rg]IKNc^R!fi]_ KYZ3ZOQKNOQ]IqGM3IfiKNOQ]IY\aNR M_ KNORTZY_qG]S/SQ]Fe_?m;c^Rgah_ K
fi]I3Z3O/KNOQ]I|O/_K ]~lrRRitkRTfiK RTZ]qYZZ3OQKNOQ]I|]kR?a$Y\KNOQ]I3_?ms)c^R_ RTfi]I3Z{fi]I3Z3O/KNOQ]I!RTI3_hM^aNRT_KNc3Y\Kfi]_NKN_
Y\aNR)K ]KNYSXSQU~]ahZ^R?aNRTZpKNc3Y\KO/_TVq]aYILU~Ke]gfi]_ KN_?V1]I^Rf?YI!lrRd]l3KNYOXI^RTZjqGaN]WuKNc^R]KNc^R?al1UgYZZ3O/I^[
_ ]WjRfi]_ KgK ]OQK?m)c^R|KNc3OQahZfi]IZ3OQKNOQ]IRTI_NM^aNRT_KNc3Y\KKNc^R?ahRY\aNRI^]I^R?[Y\KNO/PRfi]_ KN_g_ ]KNc3Y\KeR
f?YI3I^]KaNRTZ3M3fiRKNc^R;fi]_ K)]qsYIO/I3_NKNYILKNO/Y\KNO/]I{lpU{YZ3Z3O/I3[~W!]aNRS/OQK R?a$YS/_?m
fi]_ K)qM3I3fiKNO/]IO/I3Z3M3fiRT_dYI]ahZ^R?ahO/I3[g]Ifi]_ KN_Y_)q]S/S/]&e_?
p BCE>FEG:=B6p t-\ L?$Gp| ?7\y=  Nij  i^1  7\7$$gJoL7	h
	?\G\`?d=`j ff}b?\?\|o ) )C|\=~
 &s$o= 
)c3Y\KO/_TVOQq;O/_]l3KNYO/I^RTZffl1UYZ3ZO/I^[_N]WjRfi]_ 
K K ]VKNc^RTIO/_[aNRTY\K R?aKNc3YI]aRT1M3YSK ]
=m]aNR?]&PR?aTVKNc3O/_OXI3Z3M3fiRTZ]a$Z^R?ahO/I^[O/_[MY\ahYILK ?R RTZvK ]ylrRYK ]KNYS]a$Z^R?ahO/I^[lpUPtOQaNKNM^R|]q)KNc^R
k3aN]krR?aNKNO/RT_beROXWjkr]_ RTZ]Ifi]_ KYZZ3OQKNOQ]I
g  
:  1
\ 

61 t~NiQ7\v=  Nyi  t  7\7$$~J|jXjsJL?$Gp

$&

fi=&hL	
fiff=fffi^3^!"o#$%/

&')(+*,%-/.0(21%34,65+1!7893;:fi'5+8=<1!'>7=,?8=<7=3A@B<'CD8=Efi(F,?GH1JI%(K5+1!'fiLfi<8=<1!'fi7M<N7FOPJQBRTS?RU#RWVWVWV;X!RYZR[\]
E(W_(`8=E(a5+1!78b1%3c,d0<8(W_,%0feg][hOiej\]<7k8=Efi(a1%_L(W_lj1%3Alm-d,?C!'fi<8=:fiL(`1%3c<8=7n.fi_=1%G,?G<0<8@%o
pjq
^

&'1%8=E(W_r(+*,%-/.0(k1%3,5+1!7=8r3;:fi'5+8=<1!'s<7t8=E(n-d<'fi<-Z:fi-u5W,?_Lfi<'fi,%0N<8m@45+_<8(W_<1!'f] ^ E<5Es<7 ^ < Lfi(T0@
:fi7(TL2<'98=E(4Lfi<N,?C!'1!7=<7n0<8(W_,?8=:_=(%owvbE(a5+_<8(W_<1!'x<7y7.H(T5W<
z(TL9G#@DOPJQBRTS?RU#RWVWVWV;X!RYZR{r|?}~\] ^ 
E (W_=(
{r|?}~hOiej\S4<3h8=E(0<8(W_,%0HerL(T7=<C!'fi,?8(a,/3i,%:fi08y,%'fiL>{r|?}~hOiej\Q/1%8=E(W_ ^ <N7(%o
 1%8(/8=Efi,?8	8=E(s8_<.0(O QBRTSjR+!Rk}\] ^ E(W_=(Z8=E(/5+1!78	1%3,90<8(W_,%0t<7<8=7.fi_=1%G,?G<0<8@%]<7	'1%8`,
0(WC!<8=<N-d,?8(w5+1!783;:fi'5+8=<1!'a,%5W5+1%_Lfi<N'Cy81b8=Efi(w5+1!'fiLfi<8=<1!'fi778=,?8(TLZ,?GH1JI%(%orvyE(w5+1!7=8,%LfiLfi<8=<1!'	3;:'fi5+8=<1!'
/Efi,%7sS,%7`<8=7W(W_=19(T0(T-/(T'8	<'28=E<75W,%7=(%o	vbE(W_=(W3;1%_=(%]H8=E(Z5+1!'Lfi<8=<1!'Kk}Oie\nSZ1%_4k}Ojcej\kS
L1#(T7x'1%8x'(T5+(T7=7=,?_<0@)E1!0NL)3;1%_x(T,%5E0N<8(W_,%0	ego


1%8(6,%0718=Efi,?898=E(7(W8lm<'fi5W0N:fi7=<1!'I%(W_7=<1!'"1%3

Lfi<,?C!'fi1!7=<7r-d<'<-d,%0<8@4<7'fi1%8w5+1JI%(W_=(TLG#@Z1!:fi_wL(+z'fi<8=<1!'s1%35+1!7=8w3i:fi'fi5+8=<1!'fi7T!8=Efi<7'fi1%8=<1!'f]E1 ^ (WI%(W_J]
<7k.fi_1%G0(T-d,?8=<5 ^ E(T'93;,%:08y-/1BL(T07n,?_=(4<N'fi5W0:fiL(TLKOiL(440(W(W_n(W8b,%0o]hST%%U!\o
vyEfi(_(T,%71!' ^ (	_=(T#:fi<_((T,%5E0<8(W_,%01%_y<8=7k'(WC!,?8=<1!'981dEfi,TI%(a5+1!78QZ<N781/GH(	,?G0(	81/5Efi,?_,%5l
8(W_<W(-d<'fi<-M,%0L<,?C!'1!7(T7:fi7=<'C/-d<N'fi<-d,%0.,?_=8=<N,%0Lfi<,?C!'1!7=(T7W],/.fi_1%.(W_8m@ ^ Efi<5Ex<7y'1%8b.1!77=<G0(
<'C%(T'(W_,%0o1%_s(+*,%-/.0(%]c0(W8Z

VWVWV
hKGH(M,FLfi<7;=:fi'fi5+8=<1!'K1%3n.,?_=8=<,%0wL<,?C!'1!7(T7Z,%'fiL
p 
w

0(W8hnGH(8=E(_=(T7=:fi08/1%3`_=(T-/1JIB<'C3A_=1!-,%00y.,?_=8=<,%0yLfi<N,?C!'1!7(T7d8=E,?8L16'1%8Efi,JI%(F-M<'fi<-d,%0
5+1!78WovyEfi(b,?GH1JI%(b_(T:fi<_=(T-/(T'8C!:fi,?_,%'8(W(T7w8=E,?8,%'fiLd  5E,?_,%5+8(W_<W(8=E(b7=,%-d(7(W81%3-M<'fi<-d,%0
Lfi<,?C!'fi1!7(T7Wo pm
fNZhfJ%;9A?A
vyE(C%1!,%0	1%3a8=E(K,%0C%1%_<8=E-8=Efi,?8

^ (K7Efi,%00y._=(T7(T'8'(+*B89<7M815+1!-/.:fi8(FLfi<N,?C!'1!7(T78=Efi,?8x,?_=(
5E,?_,%5+8(W_<W(TL/G#@,`5+1!'7(T:fi(T'fi5+(ys,%'fiLs8=Efi,?8rEfi,TI%(,-M<'fi<-d,%0#5+1!785+1!-/.,?_=(TLs81`1%8=E(W_Lfi<,?C!'fi1!7(T7
5E,?_,%5+8(W_<W(TLG@9Ho


ctA;u"=;tiTWJ;Ah%KhT
 

|   Wm+  Ts;fi;

;   | i | i  
 

|%

;   | i | i  

 

O 

RRZR\x 

 i;

|F tB  i  

}  m   M O 

R	RZR\

|  ~F W 
 | 2

   x; | 

> "k|  ~

 4 y | xgA   | i | i  
 Bs;fiA

|? A   | i | i   Z 

   x; | t
|%} 

 " ;BW

~ W  m ~2+Z

Oir\k2O  \ 

AB   Oi\ 

 1!'7=<L(W_k8=E(a5+1!'fi7=(T:(T'5+(ax<'9t<C!:_=(aZ3A1%_y,%'(+*B,%-/.0(%ovyEfi<7k5+1!'fi7=(T:(T'5+(a<7(T:fi<I,%0(T'8
81n?+


n,%'fiL]8=E(W_=(W3;1%_=(%]5E,?_,%5+8(W_<W(T77=<
*9Lfi<,?C!'1!7(T7T

HrmgN
	fiff?JcJj
	ffi		j
"!#$%&'()	j*g&%ff+m,	j'	"-'.#/0 1324%657$	j8$ff$	9	
$5
	j*
 %fi
:
 ;<57$	j
 %<'=.>@?8 9+m>
 ACBt
 $
 %D*: E
 	3f3
 FF$
 G=Bt
 $
 %D: E
 	HAJIB3
 =fi @h*
 FFKEG=L%$
 M
 FNPO!H
3
 '	,%*Q. /0 132SRUT;V XWY. /P0 1Z2 \
 [t
 	j
 	j
 '	, ^
 ]_?a
 `bjc
 j
 $<%d	fi+3
e?J*
 %*
 ?J*
 )	36	j*
 
f=gE@]E`3!!ihjf6gE@]$!!lkmf6g@`*!!
ZnT=
 o
 $% g=
 	jf

  3
 9H+
 ff)	jgj
 p$': 6
 9	jyj*
 %%*
 +#	q	j8
 	j9
 	fi  
 r stg
 uvtw)t#f=g!i$
 <+mbW*
 %q
 	q%fi'	fi%ix :	j
%Z
 y+j3
 z)ff j*
 n*)	,
 Lff$%
 %
 	j7
 Z	^	j:
 %%ff$$ 
 %=jc
 {Z|*}ctZ{Z|~tZ{Z|'?_
 {Z|l?c
 	j*
 ^
 j
 7$<
	fi *
 %
j^
  F" F" O^'?
  FETj*
 %%*
 +	fiy+*
 
W4
 LEff%
 %hx ff 	jg=
 	j7
 Z	=h{Z|*}({Z|~H6{Z|lH6{Z|~m{Z|'H
 5fi %d	
7=
 	fi<$
 <
 %%9%9 
 %%Jj
  
 	j
 >	j
 %
 +
 (
 l
 E	jgj
j
 Jfi ff$<y*
 %9"he6{Z|~ab{Z|'t
 [
 	j
 
3
 *
 y+g3
 E	j7
 Z	6;+m7
 = +	jfi <Dg*
 %&%
pb
 '
 %*
 %*$	HM
 
 +
 {Z|*}({Z|~{Z|'b6{Z|l
 {3|*}\9{3|~
{Z|'m{Z|lj
 n%d	8Jj
 7' 
 	j
 	jr7
 '?l
 "4+m7
 = +	jgfi D
 %
 ffJ$
 <
 %*
 %*B
 
a
 4
 
 +m
{Z|*}6{Z|~em{Z|'m{Z|l%n%d	Qj
 $ kHgjg
j
 U_?c
 >
 
 	+m7
 = +	jfi <DgH
 	j
 %fi'n%
 	
n%d	9Jj
  
 '
 %*
 %

"

fibvi

77PqC:$
7Pe:=Ce:
Pq$
 Pqe:
Pe:=C$
Pe:=Ce:

)P'ivU3cZUviim)7'ivi@P"3iPZ@">U)Z 7P7qm(" ZUP"ZZ
6ZUE3(iv7"i"3E7'

7iq7iU ZEZqEPZvE@ 8

U)Z)Z  ZU,P"iZEMUEPi7'P3)'@)E

"i@aaiv=iv7"i"3E)

77PqC:$
Pq$(

EiP 


iPd

 )7qe$:)7qC"

U4UZ="3(&"i>@'@Zv:3P"m4U3bZiv:Z)v7"U"3E:"vEP"i3EUEiP


@;ZU'i"i 




P3'PZvUiviv7"U"ZEZ"\UEP"q"'7@jU)"7Z@"Ji'

'v:i@3bZv@,e)j=)7Z'@E"U33) ^ ZU(4'3:33)

 ZUbP"3EMiEiP

vm'iUE3ZEZivvJ3EM3EiPZi7ai7'P3)'v)EZUviHiv7"U"3E"i@  CZU
3EP"i33)

v9viZZlZv7Zv"i:QZUc'iUEjP"iZEMUEP7ZbEi)'73E


ZUE=evivQi7"U"Zv 
@"UZ


E



E'8>ivj>vv

U@'@ZcP3'PZUivQiv7"i"3Ebv"vEv

ievHPvviEjvjmZbU)Z6=E@b

 b&

c&iE7)c$4&i4U$ 

ff
fi


	

UUbvZi

vZ'@"UEjP"3,"v@,)




7>

UbP"3>Qvv3)'6vH"@EjZUbP"3,iPZ@"

>

UbP"3>QP" ZiiPZv"jv:ZU

>

UbP"3>Qi 3iPZ@"_v:ZUbiv;iQP"ZZ>ZZv"UE3a@Z:v ZiiPZ 



,'iQP"3Z>Z'@"UEj3vZP"ZiiPZ



9Ev_>qEiS

 vHZi>_





\vHUZivUUZU

Zi7HZUP"3:Z'@"UE_3mUi

P"3QZUbviv=v3ZlZ7Z@"i:@i7'P3)'@)E 

 E,vPcZivHiZ 8 j47ZZv
 3"mci'iiUcZ
ivZiiP>@Z;i@"U)P"3Z  ZU,i3iPv^ZEm$E
Z" !#" UvMZi@Z@"U)ZvZi7$
 >vv&=P"M3'@4UZvU_7ZZv8v7"U"3E(Zi77ZU
vvq>UEeP"7ZEe3aZUb7'Zv6iv7"U"ZE>P"M3'@U3EeMj@Z'@vvi" &%
'))  v
 eiivZ@"_3Ziv:P"ZiZ7"7Zv"



iv7  @=ci 3iPZ@"

P"mv)Z@"i8=ZUE3>7ZZvUi7"U"3E,vv=mZ>P"3Zv;Z3"m>P"@)Z@"m647ZZv
iv7"i"Zv:P"M3'@U3EeMZ@4vvU 

')(+*-,/.02130215476#.028:9;8)<=>?<+8:@28BAC02DEFAC.G8H@20IDGJK=L8BAM-8:8:D?N$47D<?Ofi02D?AC.G8QPPRTSUE7V#47WG.X*
Y7ZG[

fi\^]_`ba+cedFfgh`i_^jlk!fnmo]g7kpg?qghkromtsXuwvXqxXuwqnvw`b_nc)siy-ghuw`bz{jl`ig7xTvwkr|Luwkp]og

}fi~X-7U-Ui3-hb7L7~X-
/G
:)fi#)3lCQpbX)e+
$w3LG?TGBiGhQ+B#b+bH
fi+p:b)5eGlBi+bT7Qbb&b&ffpGH7G:+ebLLXB:b!
ff7-+Q #h&XC:e!BGih
 L7nh-7+ bGH7G:bLLwiCfiih!b x]-gu UQi uw`bvwzg pbe!77e okraX
 -~n+~T
zkronkrz&fa krogufowuwk!fLuwkp]og Ui
b  |bvTqnon` pi
G  kroghufowuwk!fLuwkp]og pi
|bvwqon` pi
i /Hb7 x]-gu Ui5 onkra L
 
pGH7+:$ kraG_vw`bo pi&L b| vXqon` p
G 
7+e ak!uw`bvfa o]_`b pi) xT]-ghu U ie ak!u`ivfa ] Ui#
fon_ o]_`b pi
x]ghu p
+
 xT]-ghu U ie

G )#;7
]v o]_`b pi
x]ghu pe
 
 xT]-ghu Uie Gl
  )#;7
 kraG_vw`bo Uie7 kra_vw`io piH+i x]ghu p3 xT]-ghu Ui:
kroghufowuwk!fLuwkp]og pi
i /Hb7 uw`bvwzFg Ui5 onkra L
 
 x]-gu Ui5 uw`bvwzFg Uie+LehebB
G 
pGH7+:$ kra_vw`io piHb krogufowuwk!fLuwkp]og U
+ 
7+e ak!uw`bvfa o]_`i Ui) u`ivwzg pieG ak!u`ivfa ] Ui:+
uw`bvwzFg U#
fon_ o]_`b pi
 
 u`ivwzg pie

G )e;7
]v o]_`b pi
`Lnuw`bo_  u`ivwzg p))pbe#
G
 u`ivwzg pie

G )#;7
`Lu`ion_   
b /  G
G eb7ehebB$
+ h!#K? `bf_   
 
+3e)#3ee5  
`Lu`ion_  H vw`igu   e
G 



	ff
fi	fi !"#$%$&'&()$*',+#-.#/0	&(
1$2&	435fi 67
	89	fi#
fi !"1*(:fi;3=<!$&(:>?
"'
fi#<
@A@ABC&	&	D32"$Afi;#
	ffE#
<FHGJILK*M;IN&MOOOM I)P!QSR8GT:KM4T7N&MOOOM T!U%Q#VXW PY[Z K W \U Z K GJI Y!] T \ QD

^`_ba7c)d*egfih:j,klnm!oba!p!d*_bqJrtsvuwp!dxezy{qd*m!|zqJ_}la~sg_}l_sgm!oS_}ma7l)p7eixuwdJp7smg)ei|zp7sSp7Jmto}e8^,
&

 +

fixt}:
#i,H`4#i#DtHw4L#
x)8Ji*b=!,!ff,)D7Jb70)!*~!Sw!*vJtx**!zD&bDi2g}g!H}7)7Ji7b!
#z:*!z2J)g}g!Lt}7)7iD)!}S=)DiJ)i0gz7t)ffJ)J!FJ}Jb7=!J}
*t)i)D7Jb7)!*g!)4!*0J,}iz7t)5bJ%J!*:tz*DJiiFJJb7.%xt}D!
 )7)ffJiD*Jb!ib!x47}b2D
22)}J!FJ}Jb7t!`~}bD*!SJi`7
:22)ff}J!FJ}Jb7=!z7tzJb7J8J)JiJ!tJ:tz,!#J)ff}J!FJ}Jb7t,!
}Jxz7JzJDB
:22)}JJ!J}J}7!%g4tzJb70JJ)}70!`J)*7'zHJ}J!FJ}Jb7t!%bJ
t}4JzJD#t)D*J!nJ}xz{iJ}7*:ziJiLz7J)D5}4JzJ}7!7)!
}J,4tzJ,S  D4!J5J)J!FJ}Jb7,!CJtb7)i~2bJgJ}tJ!JJb7
!}J%J  })7DJ)DJ5z:ii  !t})ffDDJ'z7J=}}D*!}`Ji0%x)!7!L!SJ}
z{iJ}7XtJ:zi*5}50g!J)JJi!*z{i)i}J!FJ}Jb7X!,iFJb7!}
7~5Jt5Si5nxxxD,7n)!  iziJJJ}#==DJz7t)J}gJ)
8 !%  !!#)=D!DiJffJz7L)J})J)J!wJ{z5JDJiJiJJb7!
}i!.C2}&i!ffJti!*J{z}J~JgiJb7!}%7gJ
tHi5}
x7iJ!#J!b!!*bJt}7b!i  ib
 C:t: F 'z,4{'zAwH!;;! #542C w#iFCHH;# 4%b {J   
	8 ff  fi
 4
 & z ff  fi   z gL 4 4{ 5  ! t! #"
$ )DJ!}bi z{!Lb !J!b!!*bJ }7b!i }  b7J i 2)D*z7nJ!L7Jb7.
*t})){!0J)z7gt)JJb7!}tJ!JJb7J!Sz:t}Di.
xz7t)JJb7t!z7tbz)bB!`J)ff*iiiX!b!!*bJt}7b!iz:D
 C:t: & %('  A;D04{n )!&;4 542C w#iFCHH;# 4 b {* +"-,C{0;4~
 )b*!;0   41  ) F&;4 1 32 ff0465 fi87`{zJ 5 9 4)
 {;:*D  Ji: w 4{; < ;7 L
. !/
L 4 9 =6>J4{
 {;:*D  4 zt; !;;! i0 {&H*?
 : 4) )!&;4 @B4:!1 A 4 
B  w
 &
 A ff Cfi B DE "
F ti!B,H7J~JJiJx  7)xJ  !Ji*bD
 b*JDb=J)F  D!xg}t}g!}77i}Jg!}%i)7)7.J)g;!z! 4 }Xz7J!FD
!J)J}!tL!zz7Lbz{}'! 542C w#iFCHH;#  iz7i! 2 ff05 fi5}*}
}}iJ)JbD8!G SH2,D!DLb#J)Ft  D!~}}g!H}77iD!)!  8JD7*in!
z7tJ!D:J)i~7)5D!!,D}!} }})iz7gtbz)b'!  DibiJJ!:=D!Di{J7)D!
)D!D)  DD`J!J)=JbD=!)J)=!t,DJ7)}J{})5z7gt)!  !`z{!Lb!!b)J)
:  D5!g}g!}77i8}2z{S7)iFJ}!#nJ)JbD! SHJ)i)~z{*!zJb7 !b!!&bJ
D!  DD2J!nz{S7)iJ!.J}zffJ)!t,D5bx!JDJ)*0}z{S7)iFJ}! 
I iz7t.J)JbD!xJ)z7K J:)iz!i)D*i   6 L`i
 t MSC# N#O#t MP !  b7)JR Q
}iD})i  J87JDT S !J)gD!=  DJ!i7~V UXW b})DSii8!J)
Y[ZK\]_^a`cbdb0egfihTj#`ckckmlonepfbqnralastralakcfubqbdeg^ofvvGw=`cbxsyfuzun{hnbg|pok}f~eg^|[e`cbu~_lon3|Aegn{b|Agfbq^|Agfus;pfie1j_fufil
zunl0rolaziegbu\
K

fi=CPyPA&=
CPPCAP++C+

&A&PC

V
R_93<+R_P9;99m[P&99
y+Aix[o&aA&A3Py&K&Vy
Ayi&yg[agG&[y
y &+
C
y&x[y+o&A&Aoidyi
observation:  1 = {(A,1), (E,1)}
consequence: not okX or not okZ

1 or1

2

1

1

0
0 0

0 0

0
true

true

true

1

0

0

1

1

1

0 and
0

1

and or7

and

1

1

1

(okZ,0)

true

(okY,0)

true

and

and

0

1 and

1

true

1

1

and

1

0 0
true

0

(okX,0)

1

0 and

1

1

true

true

1

and or6

0

1
(okX,0)

true

1
or5

and

and

and

and or4

and or3

0

0 0
true

2

and

and

or2

and

1

and

1 1

0

true (okY,0)

1

1

1
or5

and

2

and

1

or2

and
true

1

and

and

and

(okZ,0)

(okZ,0)

 [agyPou&VA}  KGaiV+KiAaquVA
 
K CAaCCC yiGoidy+
{{(okX,0),(okY,1),(okZ,1)},
{(okX,1),(okY,1),(okZ,0)}}

or1
{Y}

{Y}
{{(okX,0),(okZ,1)},
{(okX,1),(okZ,0)}}

{{(okX,0),(okZ,1)},
{(okX,1),(okZ,0)}}

and

and
{{(okX,0),(okZ,1)},
{(okX,1),(okZ,0)}}

{{}}

{{}}

and
{{}}
true

or2
{{}}

true

true

{{(okX,0)}}

{{(okZ,0)}}

{{}}

true

true

{{}}

and

and

and or3

{{}}

{{}}

{X}

{{}}

{{(okX,0)}}

or2

and

{Z}

true

{{}}

{{(okZ,0)}}

and or4
{{}}

{{(okX,0)}}

{}

(okX,0)

{{}}

{}

true

{{(okZ,0)}}

and

and

{{(okZ,0)}}

{{}}

and

and
{{}}
true

{{(okZ,0)}}
(okZ,0)

q<yi& VyidKu[gAA  K&    C  &[i/    &&K
i}Ggy+guKaio& T K& A 8
   
G[!KR	ff
fi[
fiC	[ff!
!

"ffff#[[$&%

' )(

fi*,+-/.0123

457698&:<;=8>:?4@Aff?#@:A@:$B?DCEBffFHGI<JLKNMOB)PQ6&Rff6&S9TQ@U	6V?#WXZY76&SBffFHX[:?:X[Aff\^]:A_?	B46946`@SAff8@69]DY#a
bHcdecfbOgeh cdji9k#gedlkmcgkmcfnldoi :?Vp!:$_WS6q9r:4sRff6&SatXuW8vU]	6&5769?]69?w@sB?V@U	645m698&:$;=8OBffY=46&SRA@:$B?
CoIEx,U	6&S6&FfBffS6ffTy:$FO@zPQB{BffY=46&SRA@:$B?4"C J Aff?]|Cm}~S6&Ff6&S[@B{@U	64AffX[646&@[BffFA@BX[4"GT@U68B4@
BffF,_ff69?	6&SA@:?	_@U	69:$S8B?469W	69?8694PO:\\^Ym6>@U	6t4AffX6ffIMOB)PQ6&Rff6&S9TQ@U	6t8B4@BffF6`@SvAff8@:?	_@U	69:$S
X[:?:X[Aff\7]:A_?	B4694,X[A9atY76]:<76&S69?#@&I
p	BffS~A{8B?8S6&@66`AffX[5\$6VBffF@U:4\Aff4@5mB:?w@&Ty8B?4:]	6&S>Aff?D7Y:$@Aff]]	6&S>Aff?]D@U	6VFfB\\$B)PO:?	_
BffY46&SvRA@:$B?4&
>C J \\:?5W	@)BW	@5W@QY:@4AS6Z\$B)P6`86&5@OFfBffS,@U	6;Sv4@,4WXNY:$@&I
>Cm}\\:?5W	@)BW	@5W@QY:@4AS6Z\$B)P6`86&5@OFfBffSOAff\\4WXNY=:$@4&I
x,U	6[8BffSvS69457B?]:?_t8B?469#W69?8694BffFs@U	6946"BffY46&SRA@:$B?4PH:\\jY76YmBff@U\:?	69AS:?{I"MOB)PQ6&Rff6&S/T
@ U	6~;Sv4@ZBffY46&SvRA@:$B?\$69Aff]4u@B@zPQB{X[:?:X[Aff\Q]:A_?	B4694Z @U	6~;Sv4@ZFW\\Aff]]	6&SUAff4AYSBffff69?
`BffS_A@6POU:\$6@U	6u4698B?]BffY46&SRA@:B?\$69Aff]4O@B~rVX[:?:X[Aff\]:A_?B4694s69Aff8vUBffF@U	6FW\\
Aff]]	6&S4HUAff4A>YSBffff69?`BffS_A@6ffIZx,U	6&Sv6&FBffS6ffT8BX5=W	@:?	_>@U	6X":?:X[Aff\l]:A_?	B4694BffFQC J :4\:?	69AS
:?tT	YW@,8BX5W	@:?_@U6ZX[:?:X[Aff\=]:A_?	B4694BffF^Cm}:4s6`57B?	69?w@:Aff\e:?tI
x,U6u\Aff4@Ff6&PBffY=46&SRA@:$B?4HS6&Rff69Aff\!A~X[6&Sv:$@OBffFQ45\:$@@:?	_@U	68BX5W	@A@:$B?BffFX":?:X[Aff\l]:A_
?	B4694s:?#@B@LPyB[4@6&54&8vUASvAff8@6&Sv:$9A@:$B?BffFlAff\\m]:A_?	B4694sAff?]>@U	69?~6`@SvAff8@:$B?tBffFlX[:?:X[Aff\B?	694&I
x,U:4j:48B?w@SvASva@Bu8BX[XB?5SAff8@:86O:?4@SvW8@W	S6YAff469][S69Aff4B?:?_	TYW	@:$@Aff\\$B)PO4B?	6@BuX[Aff6
XBffS6ZS6;=?	69]V4@A@69X[69?w@4HB?V@U	6Z8BX[5\$6`	:$@La~BffFjX[B]	69\$YAff469]]:A_?	B4:4&I
o~>o	LQlL=ffl
 O
6 UA/Rff6O5Sv69469?w@69]"A8BX5S69U69?4:$Rff6A55SvBAff8vU[FfBffS8UASvAff8@6&Sv:$9:?	_ZAff?]8BX5=W	@:?	_X[:?:X[Aff\]:<
A_?	B4694^_:$Rff69?[A4@SvW8@W	S69]4a4@69X]	6948S:$5@:$B?I  UA@Q:4!XB4@^:X57BffS@Aff?#@AY7BW	@!BW	S^A55SBAff8U
:4@UA@Z:$@@:$694Z@U	6"8BX5=W	@A@:$B?Aff\^8BX[5\$6`	:$@LaBffF]:A_?	B4@:8S69Aff4B?:?	_@BARff6&SaX69Aff?:?	_ffFW\
Aff457698@BffFH4a4@69X[49"@U	6~@Bff57B\$Bff_ffaBffFH@U	69:$S4a4@69X4@SvW8@W	Sv694&Ix,U#W4&T^:$@5SB/R:]	694]:A_?	B4@:8
5SvAff8@:@:$B?	6&Sv4PO:$@UXBffS6t=6`:$Y=:\:$@za:?69?	_:?	6&6&Sv:?	_@U	6tS69457B?46>@:X[6>BffF@U	69:$SA55\:8&A@:$B?4&I
x,U:469X5UAff4v:4B?"4@SvW8@W	S6UAff4^Y76&69?"@U	6H869?#@SvAff\=@U	69X6H:?5SBffYAY=:\:4@:8S69Aff4B?:?	_Z\A@69\$a[Aff?]
@U	6&S6HAS6OA?WXuYm6&SBffF7Bff@U	6&SyAff\$_ffBffSv:$@UX[4FfBffS:X57BffS@:?_@U:4!@U	69X6O:?w@BZX[B]	69\$YAff469]]:A_?B4:4
 698vU#@6&S,  698Uw@6&S/T7q9ffff6?	6&SQo69AS\T=q9ffffIxOU	6&S6AS6O4BX[6,ff6&a]:<76&S69?8694&TU	B)PQ6&Rff6&S/T
Y76&@LPy6&69?BW	SO5SBff57B4Aff\Aff?]V@U65S6&R:$BW4sB?	694&
~:$Rff69?8B?469W	69?8694!Aff?]u@U	6@U	6&BffSv69X[4j@BX[Aff?:$5W\A@6@U	69XVTffBW	Sj5SBff57B4Aff\#8&Aff?ZY76R:$6&Py69]
Aff4HAFSAffX6&PQBffSv~FfBffSO4@SW8@W	S6YAff469]]:A_?	B4v:4:?4@69Aff]tBffF4:X5\$a[Aff?Aff\$_ffBffSv:$@UXI  6]:]
5SBff57B46A457698&:<;=8Aff\$_ffBffSv:$@UXPOU:8UW	@:\:$&694B:?#@S6&694&TeYW@BW	SFSAffX6&PQBffSv8&Aff?{Aff8&8BX
X[B]A@6Bff@U6&S,4@SvW8@W	Sv6YAff469]VAff\$_ffBffSv:@UX[4  @UA@O]	B?	Bff@?	698694v4ASv:\$a>W	@:\:$&6B:?w@Sv6&694yAff4
\B?	_"Aff4H@U	6&aV5SB)R:]6ZA"X698UAff?:4vXFfBffSHA55\a:?_@U	6?w@6&Sv4698@:$B?sBffSSB\\ASva>6>8&:69?w@\$a
 46&6  ASPO:8U	6ffTlq9ffffYmFBffSHAff?V6`AffX[5\$6)I
  
6 UA/Rff6]	698BX57B469]|@U	68BX[5W	@A@:$B?|BffFX":?:X[Aff\s]:A_?	B4694":?w@B@LPyB:?]6&5m69?]	69?w@
4@A_ff694&^8vUASAff8@6&Sv:$9A@:$B?>BffF]:A_?	B4694QW4:?_8B?469#W69?8694Aff?][@U	69?"8U	B#B4v:?	_ZAX":?:X[Aff\
4vW	Y46&@BffFj@U	69XVIxOU:4s46&5ASvA@:B?UAff4,A@O\69Aff4@@U	S6&6ZAff]RAff?#@A_ff694&IQp!:$S4@&T:$@,Aff\\$B)PQ69]W4s@B
B76&S_WASvAff?#@6&694B?t@U	64:&6HBffFjA8B?469#W69?86POU:8U>ASv6:?]	6&5769?]	69?#@BffFo@U	6?WXuY76&SyBffF
/7mff&9)e/ffZ/^v)s9Qffvvy)9)eLH/u&
z#ff/ w)w) 
/

fi=vw	ff
fi=

	 !	#"$ %
&'


(*),+-+)/.'02143+.65#-7#89:8;=<.6;>+;?<.6@.'?A;9B@+CB9:8BDFEG9AH%;BI+;J.'007LKM9:3ON8F;7/+-?A7'@=PQ7'@.6;9G3+R!9B@=9:-;
),+-+)/.'0S+;UTV?A@+;9B@+.WKG+;=<7#N;J<.:XY+-5Z;7V.'0;9B@>;=<9[?<.6@.'?A;9B@+C:.6;=+7#-\.'05'7'@+;=<)OD^]_+-.'00T'I%+;
+S-8P+@9:3`./39BX%+?A9a?A7#)/P+0.6;=+7#-b;9:?<-+c%N9aKG<+?<O+S8>3+8=?BN889:3b+-(*dff.6@=Ke+?<9'Igf:h'h'i6. 1D
<9l;=+)/9l.'-3m8P.'?A9	?A7#)/P09AH+;UTn7'o[7#N@p.'05'7'@+;=<)q39BPQ9:-38`-7';,7#-0Tr7#-s;=<9t8TY8;9:)
j,k
;7'PQ7#07'5'T	uN;ff.'087b7#-v;=<9Z8TY8;9:)w7'u89B@=X6.6u09:8:D[xy-tP.6@=;=+S?BN0.6@:I!KM9V<.X'9/8=<7LKe-t;=<.6;[;=<9
)/7'@=9Z7'u89B@=X6.6u09:8GKM9Z<.X'9'Iz;=<9{9:.'8=+9B@[+;ff+8e;7O3+S.65#-7#89Z.`8TY8;9:)wN8=+S-5,7#N@[.'05'7'@+;=<)OD
| 9<.:X'9.'087aP@=7XY+39:3/.a@=9A}-9:3V?A7#)VP09AHY+;UTZ@=9:8=N0;4Ke<+?<Z9AH%P0S+?B.6;9:8^P@9:?B+89:0T~;=<99ARQ9:?A;
7'o48TY8;9:)7'u89B@=X6.6u09:8>7#-O;=<9W?A7#)VP09AH+;T`7'o_8;@N?A;=N@=9 u.'89:3\3+.65#-7#8=+8:D
j
j

] +-.'00T'IYP@=9BXY+7#N8J.'05'7'@+;=<)/8><.X'9a@=9:8;9:3O7#-\;=<9a0.'-5#N.65'9[7'o_?A7#-8;@.'+- ;=8e.')V7#-5/){N0;=+
_
j
X6.'0N9:3WX.6@+.6u09:8BD_ffN@g.6PP@=7#.'?<{N89:8.PN@9:0T07'5#+?B.'0#89B;;=+-5IKG<+?<W.'007KG8g?A7#)VPN;=.6;=+7#3+@=9:?A;=0TG7#-W77#09:.'-W8TY- ;=.HQD
<+8!u@+S35'9:8Q;=<9^5#.6P~9BX'9:-ao*N@=;=<9B@uQ9B;UK9B9:-W8=;@N?A;=N@=9 u.'89:3
k
@9:.'87#-+-5/.'-3\)V7Y39:0 u.'89:3O3+.65#-7#8=+8:D

#4F	U^gm'
<9~.'N;=<7'@K7#N03\0S+'9a;7/;=<.'-`^7#N8@+zM0g].6;;=.'<t.'-3tff@=9B5'7'@=T\^@7X6.'-\o27'@eP@=7LX%+S3+-5VN89Bo*N0
?A7#)/)V9:-;=87#-	.'-O9:.6@0+9B@>X'9B@8=+7#-O7'o;=<+8P.6PQ9B@:D
k



fia%

vF>FFrZvF '^$z!'Ugz4z $
 SF6Q:Z:AQ:^#J=B=::=6=#,'B#6=#O','2'/={=:A:p'AYB

'6BMyG'S/=L%S:e/%~QBe'_'QB6=#e#\={=''::	=B=:=: =6=#t'	#V
'=YB6:bA#': =#BFff/6BS'`=6Q:VSM:A:=6=/VB=',=G:Y
YA%[=Y:b==###>=a6QB:
pL%:Y!L2!^
 sGF*#	L'B`6#/VS{v':J:A:n'A%BS`'6re===BOQ:V'
Y:B{B'fiU%::'YU%:W''U%::b'~:'SB'^Y/4_ 2!z gQ2a
 YffGB=

 rq'	
 
fiff#
 M' %{ S'
 '6B=::=a
 %#:'
::A~' #eB
/yVB'fiUY['\ 2!z

gQ2^

Y=:O=B=:=: =

/=aQ#=='[B' G:V
/=WB#6='WSB'
  e:V Y
 
/yJ a' 'YUYV'="!#%$bv'J =B:: =W: :A&('y=:nB=::=
=WA#)=A=#+*,'-&('
/y>'O'UYa'\=.! #%$ b'=B=::=::A/&('=:O=B=::=>=
0 )=A=#
 1 '& ' 
a=: :AW=B=:::\%b''6	>=a::A~=B=:::O%p=>=%'eY'
^%L !g#
3 {:'a=a #SeSZ'!B6=#J,/'6.4G'6B
2

F

 6g87 29596 56g87 2!z 59687#2^Qa=:B6:>2'eY:B
, !z 5
 5g;:  !z 56gzYFA=:6:>',=B=~B B'fiUYe6Q::,e=t<

5g;
 : 
 596 5
 6gFA=:6:'b=B=>/B 'U%,2e=O/:
 5g;

 : g 5
 6g=MA=:6:G'O=B=>VB 'UY,2e=\/=:!
 6MB AF'e%[/=a=:b'_Y/
 AQ
,
 66 =?>gS@
 C4>zSD

 6gE
 5FB A^=B=J=aS=:b'_Y/
 AQ
!HGY!L2'
3 {''>=a2#LeVA#': =#e=b=:Q:A4G'6B
/yJI\>'4G'6=:I\e!'/Q[:\,:'a=a=%'>'JIQ
 3 V=L
 K*N M?O{O:'Z'	'U%We=tpS=:l'
 PBR
 Q%STOZb:'V'	'UY
G=O,:
 3 {/'e =W=:A=#'_6Be'==/Z=6=B`Q#>eJ6B
,eU
 4g'6Z=%':{64#/J%J 'V:{ =# =64YJ'Z'=:=A:'=B
  Y['O=W::AW>=B=::=eSQa:\AY'':6'

VXWY

fiZ\[?]8^`_acbUd8ef^@]\gihjdEk?l8[8eXhme4n?efhol8kqpDr;sDn?tDr;nEs;^`]Eap@uHefr;^`v

gi^@eXtws;hoxyr;hm[8l?e

z4{9|?}~,08
U`?m;T;.0`mom;4(yfR8

n8

or
n7

n5
and



and

n4

n3

n6

(okX,0)

or

true

n1

n2

(okZ,0)

false

?mJyfR?TEDE`o;DERyDLTRD

-N RXTyR\EmEE`o;DEE.y<TymmT
 .@
( 



(
( 

Jf;

DHE9



9T;



9;

9T;
9
9


?@  9  J
  


?@     

T;



 9   
9

( 
( 

9
89@    9
  


89@     

;

DHE9

9;

9T;

9
 9  9 



 ( 
89@  9  9 



89@

9

?@

( T@
,9( 

89@

X

 9   X

fi?mwE

	8		E@??(yc

R?`y(`H`(

 	  mff
fiEf  fi          m  fmU   
  f      !               "  "  fmJ # Emi
     ()  *   fi  +
, .- ?/
fm  ff0 & fffi (  1  * 
234653873+9;:0<:=?>;9A@
B        m    m)     DC %
    yfFEHGJIKL
O+PRQTSRU;V WRX EHGYLAZ\[0]+I^`_"
E



a 4A385<:`=b>;9c7@
B       
B   4
 y     (

m


   m    U 
  ffw    
  
  
  $ff%  &fi   '


"





 G

m




 


 KNM

fi  ( 
P V0VUfg E d L h fiUhg;fiPRj;g E d Lk"
  e
 d T
  eC; y    &  X 
  E



m





E

0




?


/





?




     Fdml-
* 
- (
   ff%  ynEHGAIK+L Fdpo

'rqbs VgP s g q PgtUhu6v EHG)L m  kfi w
' O+PRQSRU WcX EHG)L x fiEmyKt"
z  yfffi n E    m  "4$       l 0%  E C /
T{% l+-    n| UPRu ?E }#L~  fi     
 f  
   f  /   $     
              fiUtVg E?}#L  fi       y/t      " - 
        p,  " o
' B  fi  
   &
  
,  fi  fi   x fi   
  b          

m

 <  } o	
 R/fi  y

qbs ucUh E?}Lm[H$Yn?&})81n?H$t`_
]^$"/c}Z\[_
]8"      fi  ]
]8"       fi  O8PRQSRU WcX E | UPRu E?}#LL q{s ucU E fiU;Vg E?}#LL
' B fi  
    & 
,  fi   {      

m

     fi       
    y
 

m




 "  } o

 U s h
U fiPgtU q{s V0gTP s g q Pg q W s V E?}#Lp[$r)H$Y?}$nbH$h`_
]^$"Uc}Z[_
]8"      fi  [[__
]8"  m   G) | UPRu E?}#L
2   U s UfiPg;U q{s VgP s g q Pg q W s V E fiUtV0g E?}#LL
]$"
]8"
q{s V0gTP s g q Pg;Uu6v EHGL      fi  2
]8"
[[EHGJIKL_~& o M 2 _
 m     fi 

ffk c
  <h46?387@
               m    ZA#"Emm      y d \
Z [EI^0LkI0EIff]TLkI0EI^0L_"
 fi h `    - E J- 
T/ PV0VUfg E d Lk"  q{s VgP s g q Pg;Uuv E.L<m  fi   
  O+PRQTScU WRX ELJZ
]+"J  0   l q{s ucU E[0IffIff_`LZi - E   U s UfiPg;U q{s V0gTP s g q Pg q W s V E[` Iff#Iff_`LZ
[[EH I^0LkI0ErI^0L_I	[E I]TLkIErI0^0Lk_I	[8EHI^0LI0ErIff]L_TIJ[EH Iff]TLkI0ErIff]TL__"

0;`6kH1keRH	RH`i	`H HHHHpH`H1J`1kk.`HffH.
0

fi#ht0tT#.	httk/ hth;.Tk8/th

	ff
fi			fi!#"	
%$&"')(fi*,+-/.0.01	2*')354
6.7fi82*fffi
6fi
9 
6.0:;(	fi5.
<>=?A@CBEDGFIH	JLKAFNMO=PEP=RQSBE?GTVU6TWGHLFNQSKABEXYKZX[=?\JL]#BE?A@^]_@`J`HCWAX[JLWAHLFaDZ@Lbc@`J`FadeDGFa@CX[HCBfAJLB=?gQSKGFIHLFhX[=df)=0i
?GFa?\JSDGFa@LX[HYBfAJLB=?A@ffjlkm]#?ADjln*@LKA]0HLFoJLKGF-]#@L@LWAdl]0pPFVq^rtscu

Pwr
B

A

A

B

B

A
X
Y
D

C
C

C

D

vGw;xyvGz

D

}~

vG{


vG|

[0&yE6
a[0&yE6
R[[







	>[y`#
0c[[y`#
R[[




 

 FXI]#?]#=BEDJLKGFh@LKA]0HCBE?AT-=#M]#@C@LWAdl]0p6PEFoqffrtsp\b8BE?\J`HL=cD6WAXIBE?GTV]#?]#WG;BEPBE]0HLb?G=;DGFoqffrtsR]#?AD
d ]0;BE?GTVBEJtFa\WABE]#PFa?\JJ`=-JLKGFS@LKA]0HCFaDg]#@L@LW6dl]0p6PFNqffrtsh]#@5@LKG=RQS?gBE?lJLKGFffU6TWGHCFp)FaP=Q&@	]HCFa@LWAPJ
l
=#Mff]#DADABE?ATJLKABE@o]#W;GBEPEBE]0HCb?G=;DGFZq^rts  Q>Fg?G=PE=?GT#FIH-KA]#FZ]7X[=dgd=?]#@L@CWAdl]0p6PFp)FIJQ5FIFa?JLKGF
X[=df)=?GFa?\J5DGFa@CX[HCBfAJLB=?6@	jlk]#?ADjlnOp6WGJ5Q5FKA]a#Fh]VX[=dgd=?Z?A=?;i]#@L@LWAdg]0p6PFqffrtsRABE?6@`J`Fa]#DY

Pwr

Pwr

Pwr

A

B

A

B

B

A
X
Y

C
C

vGwGxvGz
}~




vG{

&[[  &
 yE6
 
&&[[ &
 yE6
[ 

C

D








vG|

	>[  y
0c[[ y
R[[ 

D

D



vG
R
R 


[ [
 R[[


[  
R[[

 K6BE@	@LBdf6PFffJ`FaXYKA?ABEcWGFNXI]#?Zp)FN]#PQ^]ab;@^WA@`FaDgJ`=-Fa?A@CWGHLFJLKA]0J^?G=@LKA]0HCBE?AT=#M,]#@L@LWAdg]0p6PFa@JL]0#Fa@
f6PE]#X[F^p)FIJQ>FIFa?X[=df)=?GFa?\JDGFa@LX[HCBEfAJLB=?A@IS=#J`F  KG=Q>FI#FIH  JLK6]0JJLK6BE@Fa?A@LWGHC]#?6X[F^X[=dlFa@]0Jt]hfAHCBEX[F#u
 KGF5@`J`HCWAX[JLWGHCFaD@`b;@`J`FadDAFa@LX[HCBfAJLBE=?hQSBJLK]#W;GBEPEB]0HLbN?G=;DGFa@	?A=N]#@L@LW6dl]0p6PF@LK6]0HCBE?GT\QSBPEP0Jbcf6BEXI]#PEPEb
p)FJ`=#f)=P=#TBEXI]#PEPEbd=#HLF5X[=dlf6PF[JLKA]#?-JLKGF	=?AF	QSKGFIHCF5@LKA]0HYBE?GTSBE@]#PEP=RQ5FaD  KAB@,BE@XIPEFa]0HCPboJLKGF>XI]#@`F
BE?JLKGFZ]0p=R#FgF[G]#df6PFgQSKGFIHLFJLKGFZ?G=0i@LKA]0HCB?GT0i=#Mi]#@C@LWAdl]0p6PEFa@oPFaDWA@oJ`=J`HC]#?A@`MO=#HCdJLKAFg@`b;@`J`Fad
@`J`HCW6X[JLWGHLFoMOHL=d]J`HLFIFVJ`=g]_T#HC]0f6K
a

fi6EcA

low

mid

high

M1

 C1

M2

C1
C2

C2
O

G



O

G

 

  


 
  
 



 
  
 

G 
  



 


8

G 
 

  









 O,c 
 O   
  
c
G
O  c   y
         
      
     
  OcY
  ;

   




R0
R0
R0
R0

 AaS	ff
fi-6L6#A;G#AfiAL	6hE60#EG

&GLl[G	;GaEEG [

!#"%$'&(*)+,-.0/1)204365798:;=<>5?@)+<BADCE!)+!FG79EHC0,JIK7L5!7LME!,N
O/PffG
 Q
 ERffA
 	^ ST) aAAVUG
 Q@` _LA L` aW[TX` C#ffff + A_+YL Tl
 S6Z E5 TC EG(.>ff
\[
;TI 
SS
 ` L;ATIG#;U EE0ffg
] S`  EW` ^ffG
 _X]\X` Dff` CT`LGL+a
b S ,L EG^ AL 0 #EGac0 0CES6Z ff TX` a#+& S` 
d G
 eH5 8STA L+f
GgN EEZ EETX` YS` a8,L EG'ffG
 PO EQS EG`GU +^6 +
h ,L EGI	_[^) Ga-iA
 	f
A
 +	 GSE t #AlGNX6 I jffG
 S6  	 affG
 IiklSmPno'prq
#PsWpVt+
s #6fiffG
 TX6  	ff a	ffG
 I(lS
u #'lwvx5 6GffffG
 IYl
 #L+y,L , L effA
 SgffA
 	i[^) GazA
 +
.> ^ #A{ cA|~ff} #A|-; ,Y
'[^) GaI#=)Z hLA LL a` a+ffG
 QS E&GL_[
ff6
 	6 GL+yL> A
 # ^H5 #\;U EE0ff7
] S` yji} #AxSy9iA
 	f
CA L` aWe[TX` C#EWff d G
 
6Yffg[TX` C#EWyGi}Ay aTC GL{ffA
 SPklSmPno'pr7
q #AspVt+7
s 0L_ L A#EZ
] `U\ITL # #A7`U\A
 #,XL # +
 0L= L A#E/
] `UIETC # + d G
 8S` K
d G
 =` [A4[Tff` C#EWy-Sty aTL GLffA
 S^|~_} #A|Z
i} #AeffA
 AE#^ ]\)Z o+Z,` Iff# a` gay #f[PffG
 ` P[Tff` C#EWff d A
 S y\y #S#W]X]\X` 
+Z,` IY SL cyW>
 z TX	 +`L6#E] EW# +# ejG, G>T_ Ri(i},` (l
 S# L GL
ffA
 SgffA
 P.> K[TX` Y#EffN 0LoaO #Y[a9
] La+` 6S6Z KZ _ffG
 ZLA LL aL SL m	- G+ +([TI	L Z+ G
d 6
 	 STA C+Y
 	 CaESL # a
 AE`U\) `j4)Z X` I*` EL EPO #L6 L` aWL EGiL ,Y
(X]ff`  # # ffG
 >T` +>o'\kVpSSk,Yq
>
+fpr`k	 ETff` a# +o S`  d 6
 	^` EL E4S EE)Z Gff[C)Z a G`U\l
 #A 	l
 a#T^`  #L
[TI	L +A
y `RIaW LA C` aL SL E9
Q

fi,HYVT,f	,YWW,WTTXGYBf+	,

I

O

I

O

\

. Vw Sfww!HXVV,,!!rrrr..
 T

!!*H!
 TTTYY 
*YzT\Tff	T'(Tff	+	TRSSY	
KS 	0PL	+	+X
fiff9eSSY	,g^TS,,+0_S+	j:+Y+,Sf	,fi
-+ + ,+^+TX(WTLfiff+	T! Tff\Tz#"\+$fiG	T	%L&LX
 ff TYX ^	',+eRSSY	zff'+)(+*fi,.-/)021+T4350+6fi387ffTffXW
 ,T+ecSSY	,i+$*9+T:*<;=7>+TcYTffXW(>'+ecSf	,
i = TffPS+	. *@?A-BDCz+,
 BFE@
ff	SSY	 e	TXX+H
 fiffS   R ffX 	*fffi# I%+H
 L^' #\x+P	+x	
*ff T		M 	SY =$ +ff. #$ fi `z+T# NOiff TffXWffSff P 
+ffP+f+	 K 'R Pe# "XT
 M fff+^ L+T SR ^SSY	 ,	U 5Rff S	T^ PXM fiff* W V
+ffff, , +Tx TKX. fiff+ffff, ,& Y  %LXff& fiff{SSY	 ,	 	TffX+
 fiffS  [Z
 \T Tff +YK+	  R \Wff@ "+TX+Wff] & fiff TRffYTff	SSY	 # V^,+X +] 6+T
 
TS$ \T+ `Sff] T*Sffi .a TYXXK# Tff] T*+T$ ,X, J#\. bcT 
 T++zSff_A fe
g8hjiAk_lm%l`ijnogPpWq=l	iAk@r\st
( T	jSSY	 ,	# V^,+X ffY+ L+ SA	Xf+W	*u ,+
 b^va-wWfeRff
v	SY
 ,i+TO
 w	-(+	Tfi *JXX	 ` T(	XY+^  Sff O
 fiff(XWX' `fi +
U #& 	TSff  fiffT eXWX' `6Tff	Tizffff+TTSY( +] +J #T `ff+ff	 T(+ xURy+U z.{K
T	
# T  \ff@ "|fiff[
 , fi8ffff T+j +] )z T	ff+ SSY	  )K
T	 +] '		 	T
Xff+T,SY
 TT fiAYff T+>] +] _+R G +j +X}
 b TS	 	 +	Sf	 ,zSff 	TS 'feMK

X+Wff] & fiff ,	e +] e# x KTff,+{ _ fiOK
,S_	  $ T{ ~J	P}
 ffT' `ff]  TS
+ffff	T>
 +fi fi T:Sf	 ,fi Q+Y + $ \M ~ ffSff	< ,RffX' `TTT 
ffc	 _z	$
 #TTff] T
~ b^v-wf ff~~+ffff,{ PS+	
 wK KSY , v>7
~ {4 ff~L7
~ }y[ ff~ 4+M
 ~ a7,+,
~ }x[ ff~ 4+T[
 ~ a
 XWX' `	_YSff	<  ,	%
 b2#Tff	ffXe f_+   ,+S'+X c>
 ^ K
T	P+ +,_  
Tff,+9 +ff TM fiffjWff+		^Wi+T=S+		T	 fi
P	e	$ 8+ffff+W fiXXffffP TSP	 T	SSY	 ,	# V^,+X +] > T^XY
 Mb^va-wWf' +. #W V
ff	Tff4	XY+	+Y+ o+Xfi TS ffuv 	' +
 ,	,S xSSY	 ,fi  
 Mb^va-wWfT	
L' WT	+W fi}
 	+TX
 b^va-wJC#fy4b^va-wfiE_fy=y4b^v-wWfff) wJC--wSff^ ^S+	! fiff
SSY	 ,
 v  +^ W,+{ w	:zff+	4 TS + 	TXff+Wff	Sff 4
 fiffX$ fiffSY ,  	

 

 
 

 
  
G

JLK

Q%
 .X
#"
 &ff\

T_D
de

_

fi
	_.]J'

#`'4fi#R@	'#Rofi!]Tfi]aR]efiLcfi$fiT@e]	[]o:
'])$fi	)'
M2	+!^)_fiPH2_@	 ]M'fifi]'fi]]R}fi#fiT']>'WR'M'#`'R
P\{RcAj
 Hd#J	=cTfi$fiAfi#`	R'fi'=fi>fi]H]5fi#
[Ld#W#	R'
 u]'#O@T	)fiD'_fi$fi['fioHfi]ofiefi][[c	'#R
\j	 ]}'8''+d	]T#R>	
'	]5'!'']#cfi]'fi5]R	
		fi
R_ < '	R]$
fi8R 
'	R])
 	ff

_
  
@fi fiReR     
ff Rd  < '	fij\P]$
 
 %'fi`]$
 fi @' ! "W   #{%$%fi @' !&"J  '$ff#
 fi
R ]

( fidOfi']'O@fi]'.fiMfiT4T]	]*)+   -,-,-,/. W''8Rfijcfi
#fi$	]fiu	}LH'_fi= 01)243  25  2 6 . 7243fi'82 6	fi='@fi]'9)+   .
fi	:
 2 5 'fi'fi];
 )+   <=. ?>>'_fi>)cR]_][]'fi5]R'fi	|
#fiT8R'']')'']#
@A
M
M
M
M
M
M
N
N
N
N
N
N

@CB
M
M
N
N
O
O
M
M
N
N
O
O

@ED
M
N
M
N
M
N
M
N
M
N
M
N

F GIHIJLK
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
NWM
NXN

< u]'#fiT'>	fi'_fi$fiT'fiDL4fi]ZYu#`'R  < fi=#Rdc	'#R
TR'][8T'fi'fi>	
&#R'	RP

[]\

 	fiT_^ [ ]efi]5#R)]a`u{dfiT:]efiafi)'RRo'fi
>
#Rb+dc

Tfi'
fi

[]\

 	
fie9^ [ ] ]Tfij]5d#R]9`u'T.\fifiTT]	e2gfh^%`ufi
>
R'&]Tfi  2 CiW 
 	
'fi#Rb+W

j

fikml n&oqprsut&vonmwyxtz {&l&v|xLv~} vx{&z:==} =}oqnrCvoqwyov|xxLl&{ v

B

A

B

A

B

A

X
Y
D
C

D

C

D

C

Z
E

E

E

d/





/L
/L












/I
/I







ff



&/
&/








qEjbCCEEj7ECCjjEq:qE--L-m/qdC
-j-qqjEdLZ C-j4
&?'q'4*&:' 
 q EL-E~ECEEjCdCCjjELEqqLjW?q~eEqCE uu~u=
Cq] C;Ee LqqCjb/yCdCCj C-EEq

 Lq]&EEq9-m
-E]j9EmEjCjyCE
LqE] 4 jEL Ly--E]jmE
EjCjC]E
8LqE]jL
LuEWj/qEqLqEqLff-

ff


qL]/Eq

	ff


	


8Cy

 -Ed--EEj;Cq

    
fi 
fi

L-q-

L-

LEq]qj=bjEq
L j-qCjmL

$#&%

!"

LjmE

' WjEeCEaE'EqE=j ?LEE]E;EjEjCE	ff
y-)(h+*dL
EE ]d-, j.	ff

 LZ E-/-Ej/fiu--fiEL ]CE- ECCj CCE
(  hE/qWW: E-EELqq?EW? Ej?;-CEL q-Eq E
h
CdCCj

ECEE

01 - -qLqCqL2-4]dE jLECdCCj&C-EEq4
'Imqb E-Lq43] fiu;-LC-~q~EeeEqC.5  ];C~LC
L/67 -LqL #98
0  jh-CEWq-j~yLjCCE-ECEE4fi yuqLm L-LLj9C
j-LE]E;-: ]u-L<= j~uE]EjE ELCECj CCEEI'  
fi E]Ej Eq
q L	]Eq]E j eEq jL9EL-W:Eq&?LmECEE42 &Cj
-E  C9jL*Cq   qEL-eE jEE E-ECj7W>=?
 uCE@Ab
 j|C-Bfi
CEDBFHGJIHK9LNM!OQPR)STRVUWMYX[ZVR&O\P]_^a`cbWdfe$gffe$hiOBe!OjWK[h)X[UWUR&X+SkjWRVl9X[hTR&OmF
Cn9FHoqpWe$rsIse$MYMtMYRVX9O\hTKuXuOBeYrvZwK9jWjNRVZwhTR&Oxr?]Br?hTRVyzr?hvSTLNZwhTLNSTREFq{|jQrvLWZ}p~XZ&X[rvR9IqRfpWX+9RhTKuZVK9yuUNLNhTR)hTpNRZVK9jNrvR&LWRVjNZVR
KEgffR&XEZ}p~ONe$rvZVKEjWjNRVZwhTR&O\UNe$RVZVRfXEjWOhTpNRVj\ZVKEjE|K9e$j~XEM$MZVK9jNrvR&LWRVjNZVRVrVF
N

fiB_;t	
 m_|4;	;E+NVm<&+&++;&+;+q	E	+a[	;+x	+
qm&;?ma.	W+aEffmEm<aB<+a+BQ+W;-};<
[af+q+&~q+a[a+&+a++QWff<-};;tu+a&+
Em&m;	[m&+Jt	|+tffE+_m$&
)&ff? 4 mV!v9aN |V!v9aN
 v4+v?|6&4 V4}4v?6&4
4



4
W







m


+<ka[;_QE+;E	;_+	W;a};;tf+a)+<&i+	+aE	a+
 ?4+++m	;J;;t~;[	+W;+aJ[aam&&
;<[B;?&+\[&\mEz;+		+mEz+q+&
<+	;~H		+	E;&+;+_++;[	a+	+m[/Nf<_
	+	[<&_;u|+xE&a[	;
 am&_+	<+4+am.t&&[++;m;.+	+	;+t4[)&+<m[Ja
&~+E+;+	4+am;Wff;-};;tu+a[+ta+	m	;qu4tama&
Qqm+[aa?\[;[	f[B/kmE

9HqWq|9$TV	
TfffiT$	fi	TfiVTvYTW	9TT T 	T\$"!$#%E&(')	*sfi}W,+
-..,/,0c
1324

fi57698;:=<>@?A;B	:C87DFEGAIH9J;6;BEKBML9B	E$J;HONQPSRQL9TQPSLIRS:=8I>NCUVB	PS:=WXDF:CBTYRSE$Z[PSEK6;J9B

\^]_]`;a_b_cdfe"gihkj=llnmo
prqsts9uMs9uMvxwyQs;qy{z

|

} ~S9V=I%r)%Sr
{
 tX_MS_3[i;K[iKI[CK%K=tS37" 
_YI;I$$=[)=I3Q~S39[(xS3I[rIS=
 [	7)K9K%=S=K3
 ~{3"S9%i=IK3Q}S~SI=I%KiS[
=9K3Q_S37i [I
7" X_tK%;
%{KS^YF;==C[IK=9I$$=iK"IS;IK$=[Vr=93Q~I3I[
 K9K%=S=K3YI3~I3Y~I[t=r
   
}S~SI=9%KFIK%=S=rS3(^)k~IF"=IK3Qx7[[3
) X  ir  KI" X    )IK)i3[9I%7~I3Y~I[
k=i@9[SK[97)x=~IKrK9=IK3QIKYS$KS[
prqsts9uMs9uMvxwyQs;qy{z
 =KK9$3$	=SS;9$$=[)i=I3Y~S3I[IS	9%	[	$3%$=S[3
prqsts9uMs9uMvxwyQs;qy{z
 $ 	[9	[kI%x3[	K[~IkKO[V	$3[SIK~IIK=^[K[~93
(7  S	SI	3$=[=S={[~9%9$3 p [I  KFSI3$=
[=([~9%9$3F7x7[[3i3CK=IM[%=I%r%I3%	FK^S[[
3$S
    3I[V( X 

 

[Ii( 

  K3Y~I$%[$3QkI[

  _3I[;^7  K3Y~I$%[$3Qk  
S	[[  K3Q~IK[$3QiX==KS3$[  S=%	9KSK
KI=9K3QKS[[)%S 
  KS"=~II$=[_[K  MS="%	9KS
  KKI=9K3Q$
prqsts9uMs9uMvxwyQs;qy{z
(9[r9KS[3Kk;
 k)[St[tt)%Itn)%S3t
 3[K9%)%St=nKiS7=S[33Q3I3Q[K$3
3Y



=

Q

	CI%SY3)S[)I%	%=)$iC[I
ffFfir=
SK_I%%9[  I%SY3_S[I%%=_KQ[I  inMi=

SKI%%9[

fi "!
#$&%(')%+*",-%/.0$132,&45('76.98ff:<;>=@?BA13,&.DC+'5($E2GF&'IH>6G%+*D,&.KJL132M,&4"5('76M.LNO:P;>=@?BA)5+6M."1Q'R%+*0'3CS'7,-C+').0$
1Q$ET
TU$E.U,-%($ETV5XWY'3%ZHI'3'.
8 : ,&."[9N :<\^] *0'3C+'3_`$&C+'&a&%+*0'b
cZ132,&4"5('5X[0'3Cd6GF&'[e_fC+$ETg8 : ;>N : ;h=@?BA
,-CS'%+*0$E5('[0'3Cd6GF&'[i_fCS$ETj8ff:&;k=@?BAL6.l,&[["6G%+6G$E.m%($V%+*0$E5+'[0'3CS6GF&'[i_`C+$ETnNB:-;k=@?BA \po(qlr %s%+*0'.
_`$E22G$@H>5I%+*",-%)%+*0'h5(%(C+$E.0t&'5+%sb
cZ5('.u%('."1Q''.u%+,&62G'[mW Jm8 : ;VN : ;m=@?BA	vwH>*"6M1S*i657'xu4"6F,&2G'.u%
%($l%+*"'91Q$E.-y(4".1Q%+6G$E.z$&_I,&22Xb
cZ132,&4"5+'5	'.K%+,&62'[{W J|8	: ;}NB: ;~=A9v 65ff'xu4"6F,&2G'.u%	%($l%+*0'
5+%(C+$E.0t&'5(%Ub
cZ5('.K%('.1Q'l'.K%+,&62'[W J8ff:";=@?OA}1Q$E.y($E6.0'[H>6G%+*%+*0'm5+%(C+$E.0t&'5(%Ub
cZ5('.K%('.1Q'
'.u%+,&62G'[}WuJiN : ;{=@?BAE
X-0&- ?R X-" ?O X-" ?d
H*"61S*l2',&["5s%($0
X-0 &  ?R X-"   ?YB X-0   ?d
 \ X&0   ? X-0   ?  I,&."[ X&0   ?7 X-0   ?   \
] *0'},-%($ETV5%+*",-%
,-"Y',-C
6.?W40%V[0$.0$&%,-"Y',-C
6.?  [0$.0$&%,-"Y',-C
6.8'6%+*0'3C \
] *0'3C+'3_`$&C+'&a"%+*0'3Ji[0$
.0$&%,Y'1Q%>%+*"'L5(%(C+$E.0t&'5+%b
cZ5('.K%('.1Q'L'.u%+,&625sW Jk8;{=@?BA \7] *"'5+,&TU'
6M5s%(CS40'h_`$&C>N,&.[k?  \
] *0'3CS'3_f$&C+'&a
X&0 &  ? X-0   ?  O X&0   ?  d
I ~@E U` &XfDmK&K+-3V& ? fD3IL<ZQ(-QB0Q+V+EMQ`DlE&KS3
 :  " l` &
 ff : EQL&RS &(UE-eLX`` ?B -
 ff :E;i? MeS  `-Q7U ;i? 
ff7~
~'5+*0$@H*0$H%($V1Q$E."5(%(Cd4"1Q%  :_`C+$ET  \7 40"Y$E5('>%+*",-%  6M5I6M.132,&45+,&2_`$&CST \ ,&1S*l132,&45('ff6.
 Te4"5(%5+,-%+6M5(_fJm$E.0'$&_^%+*0'_`$E22G$@H>6.0tU1Q$E."[6G%+6G$E."53
 \ [0$ '5.0$&%5+*",-C+',-%($ETV5>H>6G%+*}?
 \ 5+*,-C+'55($ETU'D,-%($ETV5H>6%+*}?|,&."[iH7'D*",F&'D'6G%+*0'3C
 ,Ki,&."[{?{5S*",-C+',V26%('3CS,&2PaH>*"61d*lTU',&."5>%+*",-%>655+40W5+4"TU'[mW Ji?"$&C
 Wm,&."[l?k5S*",-C+'	.0$e2M6G%('3CS,&253a H>*"6M1S*mTU',&."5)%+*",-%sCS'5($E2GF&'5IH>6G%+*i5($ETU'	26G%('3Cd,&2576M.i?}%($
J6G'2[e,ff132,&4"5('Ii%+*",-%X[0$u'5/.0$&%/5+*",-CS'I,-%($ETV5/H6G%+*e? \/ $&CS'3$F&'3Ca?;ff=XAs65'xu4"6F,&2G'.u%
%($m?V;{=A \
~'D13,&.}$&W"%+,&6.  :_`C+$ET  ,&5>_f$E22$H>5 \ $&C>',&1S*z132,&4"5+'6.  
 \ 6_^656.ks2,&5+5  ,-WY$F&'&a,&["[}%($  :`
 \ 6_^656.ks2,&5+5  ,V,-WY$F&'&a6GtE.0$&C+'7
 \ 6_^656.ks2,&5+5  W{,-WY$@F&'&a,&["[l%+*0'LC+'5($E2GF-,&.K%s%($  :`\
r %5+*0$E4"2[iWY'h$&W F 6$E4"5)%+*",-%  : ;i?|65)'x 4"6GF-,&2G'.u%s%($  ;l? \
dsfSPXpBId@PXOpff3Zdp@sMppZdpd3


fi{EISK{	"dffSGuuu00E"(S0	K	
0fiff&0




!#"%$'&(*),+-$."0/213'/546+7"'89:"2;=<:>?@BADCFE*GIHKJL;=<:>?5@BADCHEM;=<6>?@BANGOH	PRQ%8+S"'8+T/63'+-UL"'8+-VXWN/YZYfi/[\$
WN3'/UL/6]$0+T3^4
_ZV`a"'89:"\bcJedgfhAibFjlk=Hm[\8+T3^+kn3^96V`6+-$%/546+T3_ZV$0"'96V"'_Z9:"'_fi/V$o/6WO9:"0/Up$qr"'89:"\9:3'+
),/V$'_s$0"0+-V"\[\_fi"'8cbPRQ%8_s$mYZ+-96t$."0/u;=<:>? @ AibHKJL;=<6>? @ Avd f AibFjwk=H0HRJxd f ;=<:>? @ AibFjwk=H	P
y P*;=<6>? @ ADCzH{EM;=<:>? @ ANGIH%| }L;=<:>? @ ADC2E*GOH	P
~mlt+,V_fi"'_Z/V2/6WO9a),/V$0+-&+-V),+6[+S89546+;=<:>? @ DA CH\| }L;=<:>? @ ADCaEGOHm96VtM;=<6>? @ ANGIH%| }
;=<6>? @ ADC2ElGOH	PQ%8+T3'+TWN/63'+6[m+U&$0"\89546+;=<:>? @ DA CHEM;=<:>? @ NA GOH%| }L;=<6>? @ ADC2E*GOH	P
 P*;=<6>? @ ADC2ElGOH\| }L;=<:>? @ ADCHzE;=<:>? @ ANGOH	P
~mSt+,V_fi"'_fi/V/6W9%),/V$0+-
&+-V),+6:[m+R89-46+o*oTC{a| }L;=<:>?5@ADCzHh96Vt7lm-G=| };=<:>?5@BANGOH	P
Q\8+T3'+TWN/63'+6AiTCHEAiM-G=H| };=<:>?5@BADCHREx;=<:>?5@BANGOH	PQ%8_s$a_s$+-&_Z496Yfi+-V""0/
XTCaE2G=| }L;=<:>? @ ADCzHEu;=<:>? @ ANGOH	[g8_Z)^8wUF+-96V$o"'89:"p;=<:>? @ ADCHE;=<:>? @ ANGOHm_Z$o96V
2 $0+-V"0+-V),+B_ZUF1Ys_fi+-ta]pMTCgEG=P=~pt+,V_fi"'_fi/V/6W%;=<:>? @ ADCEGOH	[m+gUa&$0"R"'8+-V289546+
;=<6>? @ ADC2ElGOH\| }L;=<:>? @ ADCHzE;=<:>? @ ANGOH	P

 &11/$'+"'89:"AF  ^R^*H=_Z$=9S$0"03	&),"'&3'+-tF$0$0"0+-Ut+-$'),3^_fi1"'_Z/Va96)T),/63	t_ZV`S"0/7+,V_fi"'_fi/V 6y y P=+
[o96V"%"0/213'/546+"'89:"ge5kRa_s$.),/V$'_Z$0"0+-V"%WN/63\96Vw_sV$0"'96V"'_Z9:"'_fi/VXk/6WI"'8+96$'$'&U29:]Yfi+-$  P
Q%8+S13'/
/6WO_Z$o]
w_ZVt&),"'_Z/V*/V"'8+$0$0"0+-U$'"03^&),"'&3'+6P
 &11h/$0+B"'89:"g"'8+$0$0"0+-U$0"03^&),"'&3^+7896$\9*$'_ZV`YZ+V/
t+P.Q%8+-V}x296Vt
-5
_fi"WD/YZYZ/5[\$RWD3'/U"'8+t+,V_fi"'_Z/VF/6W{p"'89:"m25kRB_Z$),/V$'_Z$'"0+-V"WD/63o96V*_ZV$0"'96V"'_Z9:"'_fi/V*k/6Wz"'8+
96$'$'&Up9:]Yfi+-$  P
 &11h/$0+"'89:"X[+89546+9$0"03^&),"'&3'+-t$0
$'"0+-Ut+-$'),3^_fi1"'_fi/VAp  ^^2H
-O6DT
$'9:"'_Z$'WD_ZV`"'8+r9:]h/546+13'/61h+T3'"6P!#"2$'&(*),+-$*"0/u$^8/5["'89:"2"'8+13'/61h+T3'"u[\_sYZY.$0"'_ZYZY.8/YZt9:WN"0+T3
[m+r96tt9Yfi+-9:WV/t+"0/"'8+$0
$'"0+-U$'"03^&),"'&3'+"0/6`6+T"'8+T3X[\_fi"'8_fi"'$l),/UF1h/V+-V"wt+-$'),3	_fi1"'_fi/V
A:	^2KH	PRQ%89:"%_Z$-
[m+7V+T+-tw"0/*$'8/5[x"'89:"\xwpw5kK_Z$.),/V$'_s$0"0+-V".WN/63\96Vl_sV$0"'96V"'_Z9:"'_fi/V
k/6W"'8+796$'$'&U29:]Yfi+-$  `_fi46+-Vc"'89:"gx5kR_Z$%),/V$'_Z$0"0+-V"TP
!#"R$'&(l),+-$K"0/$^8/5["'89:"mM725k0G=S_Z$K),/V$'_s$0"0+-V"WD/63m$0/UF+\_sV$0"'96V"'_Z9:"'_fi/VFGr/6WFaP
 _ZV),+.u5kK_Z$=),/V$'_Z$'"0+-V"T"'8+T3'+\Ua&$0"=+,_Z$0"K$0/Up+%_ZV$0"'96V"'_Z9:"'_fi/VFGI/6W.$'&)^8F"'89:"mn5k0G,
_Z$*),/V$'_Z$0"0+-V"TPe/63'+T/546+T3-$'_ZV),+pu5k0GT_Z$2),/V$^_Z$0"0+-V"rAN]
t+,V_fi"'_Z/VM/6W9u),/UF1h/V+-V"
t+-$'),3	_fi1"'_fi/VH	R"'8+T3'+Ua&$0"F+,_Z$0"p$0/Up+_ZV$0"'96V"'_Z9:"'_fi/VMG/6WS$'&)	8"'89:"*2n5k0G-0G_Z$
),/V$'_s$0"0+-V"TPom/V$'_Zt+T3%V/5[e"'8+WD/YsYfi/5[\_sV`
 2
 n5k0G-0G_Z$+-&_fi496YZ+-V""0/5k0GT0Go$'_ZV),+w+T46+T3'9:"0/U"'89:"p9:11h+-9:3^$F_ZVp
9:11+-9:3	$%_ZVw"'8+7_sV$0"'96V"'_Z9:"'_fi/Vr5k0G  0G  796Vt8+-V),+6h5k0G  0G  | }  P
 
 5kR0GT0Gm_s$.),/V$'_Z$0"0+-V"\$'_sV),+7x5k0GT_s$.),/V$'_Z$0"0+-V"\96Vtc"'8+9:"0/Ut/
+-$%V/6"
9:11+-9:3g_ZVcx5k0G  P
Q%8+T3^+TWD/63'+6xcpcr5kR0G-0GmBJx5k0GT0Go_Z$%),/V$^_Z$0"0+-V"g96Vt8+-V),+6xcpcr5kR
_Z$.),/V$^_Z$0"0+-V"TP
-5

fi%5Z



Ifi^0T='lT6ZogK6MZZl^T'^0^wZfi0T^6mZ:h-:^Zn
 Z,OM'T'-'-'.FTZ60B6O0 p:0 p%Z
 	ff
76
 fil^T'-0-'.6XZ0'6'Z:'fiw6
	ff
z'-r 6T Zfi0T^6IZOs,0^ fis,0 fir0 FFZfi0T	6OsO
 %T'TD6^6'ZBT6Z
Z

s



^

T

'



^

w

0

^





fi








I

O

o



 -, fi'gT6Z"
 !$#
 % &('*)+-,/.0!"
 '21(.K0
 3O2Zs%5 4'T'	K6
 fiZ2 7','fia6h'gsfi0T^6Z
ZX 3 
%T'TD6^6N6-6	XZ0'6'Z:'fipc6/
 /8	9
'N,'fi:
 !;1\$
 1(.z
 . !;1(.0)T$
 <(,z
 .=!
, F0-lM,	 7','Z66
 fiZ2 7','fi  T'-6^
 fis2 70,'fi'T'-0-'l6=
 3  0
p:'	Z? >p  Z.Z,'Z00-  fi'wO@
 %6A >66	fi'
 Zo'-c0
 fi>B 6-C
 %T6^ ED

GF
H{s%?
 I  Zs >6-T^:0K
 JML NOL P0QRs0'6'Z:'fiT  Z	FZ='\
hT=6'RF-=':mZZ-=JTSU  ZZ
'Th-:TWVR6	r6KZZ-%J
D26 fiU2'YX6Z22[o'BF6WHZ7Y\*'YX6-6p]I5.'BF6W%fi6rZ
ZZ- ^TS5 4  ZZ'Th-:`
 _S'B F-T@
 HZBa'YX6-ap2[R'BFS's,\KBT6hRFfiF-0fi
Zb
 p2 ['B F6c
 H{Zl5 4c6s0'Y X6-8
 22 [S'R Fl^Z,
 !$#
 % &0'2)+-,/.=!"
 '*1/.'Y X6-8
 p2 ['B F6
%T^TD6'6
ZZ-R ^TS5
 4S'Y X6d
 pe _f[O'B F6
 fi-,6
sZ-K JTS U7'Y X6g
 2e _[	=IZ6sA 6ZZ-K? I-S
 h'Y X6i
 JML NOL P0Q-pe _f[B'B F  s^nsff
 2e _[(JML NOL 	
 %l06,w, Ffik jfil uZ  6^0l'6'
'B F%, pfik jfil 'Z,. fifiZ? >SSM fi.6R:^o0'%, F0 fip,0 m-,%'Y X6-`
 p] I5O'B p6

anupobq
Ifi^0T  Tfi 0'T6':x:02rMs:'Z''6'Z:0fi00p  - 'T6Z
!$t5'*</,z !"1(.0)-$</,{.0!urMsZ/pfi60%sNZfi  zB8FfiZ:0-Ag'Z,v!$t5'*</,{ !;1/.0)-$<(,z.0!hurws
Z.A lT6sfifiXsZSF6x),0y"# !;1(.0)T$<(,z.=!w6fiMZ%Z''6'Z:0fiZsSY\26I'
' F7N,'fi
%T6Z0
 !$t5'*</,z !"1(.0)-$
 </,{
 .0!u rMsvo, F0-\'SNZfi  Z? >k j
'-''fi/
 z
{
|=}	~kfM- -2
%T^TD6'66s  Tfic02' 
Y?f3  =x

!;1(.0)T"</,z .0!$) | 'u./&{ R | l

Zo':
{

|}	~kfM- -2

!;1/.=)T$<(,z.0!$) |` 'u./&{K | l

 A6-C%T6'4fi%Z.->X02' 
Y 3  I@

':
{

?  

|=}	~kfM- -2





 T^*ff |  | %Z.'7,p-fi-',^fi'fiw6v6 fi  Z%''	70-,'fic6Ks0'6MS
'Z:'fiuc'7:0pd	9
 | :h-:^s?F
> Zi | 
Ifi^'g60a':BZ\6rZ''6'Z:'Z6=':0pBZTZBm
grMs%T'TN6'6'a,8F
:0ph
 T  T-u6
   c |x 9a07:h-:aZ6
fi O-,6I'8
 -,Fh'Z'fi%
 T6'


fi $f$5K $$B A$? ??O5"?K5w?A?B$ 

A
Y?f
 *


?	K *luu* lOR   * 
Y 
 *  


	kfM-  2


 	ff
 fiiZ OAff?O"!#$	fi&%(')+*A$-,/.0
v-0
13254768193:;1=<#:+1=>?6 @ BADC3E GF IHKIJ HRJ LL MOM N SUT
P BA?CQE &F
P

VWA
L P(a N f
ADF 	H	` H`
L aN ]
1 4X2 681=Y+:+1Z6\^ []] P AbF M IHdc
a F MF IHIc LL e=e N ]g 
P h ]]
]]_ P  a F &F
i f"."A"+0	kj 6 ADF e ."#j 254 6 A 0!#j 4X2 6 AbF e %
lRmonGpGqrpGstutvmowyxzGx{G|Wpr}
 ~
 f ~? kA "U=6 A ? ? ~ W? -3B ? ./$~!#	%(V? a0!? (&B
 ?  k  fid
  " " O ! ?     A "=U.  5
 B  
tnrK&ss xRmoprtsonGspx0s  N f  
  $ " AIB " O"O "0k `fiR? U	 =?! ?! ? 
Z
   	 fi  / O O  %( ? k-0O/?`?! &x ": W  	 fi
  
k C B7O"!##B W? $3? "C fi MfiVG
 + ; "V BWW  	 fi
 ff; ";U?! %('r$. -0$O"C! O"O "0k Bff? "!##B ? 0?! ff? d! 3%
 &mmGwD|pGqonxK|BmGp
* fi . v
  ? "!  f  	 	8    	  W  	O "! 
V? "   

tnrK&ss xRmoprtsonGspx0s   N    B+U?! % t"noK&s0s xRmGprt"sonGsprxs RQfiB "
! 5

0k 
	% t"noK&s0s xKmoprt"sGnosprxs $ N $f  BvA "!b?B  3y ttuKs0 xRmoprtsonGspx0s Q? 
 O7  68 
V
  Bff AM   	O "!&%
 % t"noK&s0s xKmoprt"sGnosprxs $ N    BB "!B ? vQ tnoKK&ss xRmGptsonGsprxs ? 
 OG   B&W
  O&$B /?   !? 	 o/ BGB /?	 xW  	O "!-R ? 	$%
V?   .? ff	    	 `  	O "!
V? " B/ tnrK&ss xRmoprtsonGspx0s
R7=?
! %
7  7? = Bff/: 0! fi3+? $r? ff)  %
vy   0 7  A ? AK   %
') BO .vR ? # t"noK&ss xKmoprt"sGnosprxs 
 $y" pw "O"!&%7?   .
? bB fi tnoKK&ss xRmGptsonGsprxs RO0fi0?  b! B fiUvB O
u
d	  avMp

fi70u/
BGG Kor"GorK5V$Q"Dffv=+Vfib"R"=;I
fi;/$~/V0+ff0"7VfiQQ+
 ";G"=U;	0R-$"+$u$"#0	
	$u  3+d 	u B#Q5
 $~  V$"+$-u
	   3;  (   $   B;3Q+  	
V$U ff
"d(	ff/$v  k 	UW"Vfiyy  fi 
=0"
 "0v#8-ff-0ff  $/$ 

U;3Q+-"/fi	fi"ff+Q3+ 
U3U0"/fi	fi"=W~3U0W"ff3$	U7 	
Uff 0ff$+;+  
7$
	$u  3+d 	u B#Q5	
VW+ffk	ff$"+Uu
!#"%$'&()$+*-, /$~  7=+$". 
 Ku
7V0fi=  R$"W((0	$~K"0 /%132& RorKGG0rKff 45) 3$ 687-V
$#U""v"/fi	fi"7 $ : 9  B 4  ;3 4  ffV$ 4  V$0W	fi;0
; 4
 "  0fi   R$"    $d 	 $ 
 /%132& RoroG0R  )  V$$=""k"/fi	fi"( $     k$
W$-	Q ; < R$-&W7=$
 "U$~0fi  R$"Uo"==U	"= 68>d( 6v	kWff 
@?BA # C $Vfidff
ff 
E D"fi
  	u BoG
 F 	$u 9  B 4  +3 4  
4I H 
V$y Uy0W	fi -/$;J 
"$	" $K 68L 4  3$yN M"3
	#?0 ; 4  P OV$	D 
	" R"~VfiO 
 B$0"0$/$= QG0GR 2TSR1K W 1SG0 1KU SR1Kor
~$"3$d "3W	W$"3E D/"fi3"Ifi" $   
d   0/Wff 
	 v-V R-$"R"# vK W4  V$B XZ\Y [$ff"/fi	I
fi"v' R-d" R 
=$^ ]"fi_ 	  < `/R"b a  c 
fi"y	~$v	=
/$  W	=0		==d R5"   ;ff "< ff4  o$e 	 

fi"
	   ++I  $  B; QQd  &f
 F $ : 9  B 4   QQd 4  
48H 
I

ghg

fiikjcl%m8n)oqpsr%tum5lkvwbrRxcy%j%t	wztP{ctuw.y%x_|}ff~{c}ff{R~ffm8lRo|53tu}ffm8vm5t	+~ffw.}ffwzj%yct
BR%! 0 %:R_%!     cz.R
:ff)  %! :R) RffVcf :ff):          	
8  
 ff8@zdR0%KRc(BR8@z K ff((:  R0%8.R
cKRV%-@E8RU5  zzz	.Rff@8<zk   @ffc(ff@8<z'  
 ff(u(#R        8zR   RV   uJE8Rz  cz.R
:ff   %!=  :ff  :0 :ff      V   	
8  
JNTcPcP%!
 Ru)sRR-RRE.8@E)3c 0(3c%(uzRzzff8ff8c)Rff
(zz@(3c 30%0R%@zzffR(ff	z3R..  ^ff)Rz(ffc-zffu(ff
. (zz ff + (%3TR 0(%0Rc#8)   R u
(%3TR 0(%0Rc#+ff(ffK	+!8K.8ff8@ZRVffR(V  ff(E
5ffR(:Tu(=z.@+@<(ffuu.(zffzz.(:cff+R3(	(:+U.
+K.Pc<(z J ff^8RRRuE8cR..8'zPff'(z=(033TR %0R%#+8!
zRBRVRR(J  Rezff8.<(zUff<zz 
)zffRff^RcE.8(3c (%0R%u(ffuRff@ff.'E8R+ffRE@8b
.!-c.E.^#u80 - 8Rzff(ff:8z(RRez-Eu8RRzffBWffRuR.
8RRzff'ff(zz+ff  Wff.8^ffcz@(UzRe 
  VR)V   
@  R    
 	kUR  R.R8ffdzRzN
  ()(ffd(%(
.8ff
 
fi V ff((+Z'+ff(z8Uzff
 KE)%% (%0R%(RuR
:ff  N 
fi   :ff T 
JNTcPcP%! 
 ffc38PcukE8W8ff5E8R+ffRE^0(%0Rc3!#"  $zzffE8W8czJ&% 
 c^R5REK(ffuff + (3c 30%0R%_z@z P' %f8z.!@zWRU.
8.c8R.RzRREz8R-cVE8NRRE.8RuBE8RucEKz(
 %.8ffu* )Vffff(8.8c	 
 R!JRRBREBzRE8W8c.ffsBff(R(<Rz,+
- dRec.Buc_(q-(\E8W8ff@ffEu.c.8R(Rz	_8z.!J8 ff
RE%R..8:	REff ffEu.c.8 
 % (ffuff +/ .100 %0R%#  W.8ff8R.R%.R
-  ffd&
c3zE8W8ffREu.Rz8Rz8ff\ (zz+ff+  Rz#8zz)zWRU.
8 3 2ffzczff@ffJcRffE+ff=/ .100 30%0R%3# 
 %(ff	ff@(%3TR 0(%0Rc#q8!W.8R=8R.uRczR
-  ff&
c3zJE8W8ffREu.Rz8RT.8RJ(UzRzJRR(  RzT(ff!
+zRRcE.88ffJucEff<:P8z5u( 
 Ru)^RR(Ruff'& %zffE8W8cz3z0-@ff('ff) zRPffff((<
E8NRRE.8^zE8RucEWz4 %.8R5 )+ffE8NRRE8Ru(@<RffRec. 
 ff(uJJ scUEff(uE8RcE.8RJE8cuRE6+
798:

fi;=<>@?BADCEGF

HJI&K/LNMPORQ	S KUTRVXW,S/ORQ	SGVKS/Y[Z]\9^`_aDbcbed,fgfehifkjd(l3hmonepmGl3fkaqhmrh9s'l3hmGbed`tpd`mGl3d`bgfkjuJfgl3h9v!vkd3w
bkxhmyzfeh4yGa{befkaDmGl3f|l3h}zxUhmd`mNf~yGd`bkl3v!aqxGfkaDhmGb,IXjd,vkd,sPh9vkd91fkjd,uJv!d=pGuJv!u9mNfed,d`yfeh4bkjGuJv!dmh
u9b!bkpG}uJDd`b,I
I&W`QR/6SS KTRVXW`S/O	QRSGVXK/SYZ]\J^@_aDbibed,fifehfkjdl3hmJnepGml3fkaqhmh9su&'vkd,fkpGv!md`yN
K/LNMPORQ	S KUTRVXW,S/ORQ	SGVKSU
feh99d,fkjd,v
'aqfkj
&&b
v!d,fkpv!md`y
N
W`QR/6SS KTRVXW`S/O	QRSGVXK/S  I=jd`bed&'bzuJvkdpGuJv!u9mNfed,d`yfehibkjGuJvkdmhu9bkbkpG}uJqd`b
b!aDmGl3dBl,DaDtpd&  u9mGybkpGfevkd,d`b  bkjGuJv!dBmhu9bkbkpG}uJqd`b,I
=jd,v!d,sh9vkd9fkjGd*'&vkd,fkpvmd`yNW3W`S

KTRVXW`S/O	QRSGVXK/S}cpGbefUdByd`l3h}xhb!uJqd9I

5[ ^|q9kJP&^G!,&\'JP\BW,QR6SGS KUT	VXW`S/ORQ	SGVXK/SU  9o'P9]P^\9
k,^*e\JP^9z{=^/\zz\9eBPJ^ J Xq']P/e,,'\4G,!JPo^/\9^G3k(!9 
Bo6&'~rr
 (	d`}}uGfkjd*bed,x/bed,f=6  aDbaDmGbefku9mNfkaDuJfed`y(jGd`mW,QR6SGS KUT	VW,S/ORQ	SGVXK/SU    #aDbl,u9{qd`y6I
 h9vkd,h@9d,v`~fkjdaDmGyd3ih9sbkpl!j[aDmGbefku9mNfkaDuJfkaqhmraDb*fkjGd9d,pbed`yra{mfkjdl,u9l!jd(qhh9pxrhm[DaDmGdH
9h sW,QR6SGS KUT	VW,S/ORQ	SGVXK/S/I=jdifeh9fku94mNp}*Ud,vh9scxUhbkbkaqDd9d,ba{b o bkaDmGl3dfkjGa{baDb
fkjd}uoaD}cpG}mpG}4d,vh9s#yGaDbkfkaDmGl3faDmGbefku9mNfkaDuJfkaqhmb9d`md,v!uJfed`ysPh9vB  mGh9fedfkjGuJfBuJfeh}bcuJvkd
aDmGbkfku9m1fkaDuJfed`yyGpv!a{mfkjdvpGmzh9s6fkjd&u9q9h9v!aqfkjG}Iml,u9bkd'h9s	u4l,u9l!jdjGaqf|hmDaDmGd=HJNfkjd'sPpmGl3fkaqhm
vkd,fkpvmGb	aD}}d`yGaDuJfed`q&u9mGyBfkjd~l,u9D1aDbRl3hmGbkaDyd,v!d`yBl,u9l!jd`y	IXm*l,u9bed~h9sul,u9l!jGd~}aDb!b,@fkjd5l,u9DaDbRmhmw
l,u9l!jGd`yu9myaqf~aDDqd`u9yfehcu9maDmGbkd,vkfkaqhmaDmNfehBfkjd&l,u9l!jdhmDaDmdBH9H'h9sXW,QX/6SGS KUTRVXW,S/ORQ	SGVKS/I
 aDml3d&fkjGd,vkd*uJvkd*mGh}zh9vkdBfkjGu9m o 9d,b,/fkjd,vkd*uJv!dBmh}zh9vkdfkju9m J !l,u9l!jGd4aDmGbkd,vkfkaqhmGb
u9mGy6	jGd`mGl3d9	mh(}zh9vkdzfkjGu9m  J X l,u9ljd}aDbkbkd`b,I*=jd,v!d,sh9vkd9Rfkjdz}uoa{}4pG}mpG}4d,vh9s5mhmw
l,u9l!jGd`yl,u9DDbaDb= o I
Bo6&&4XN/

/

 d*'aDDpGbedfkjdBsPhDqhaDmzmh9fkuJfkaDhm6Y
 Rckq

	 
 
ff

 fi 	 I
o3@```  



   ckq  
	

      

	 [
 
ff



	

	  	 
 jGd,vkd&caDb=uzmd`aDj1Uh9vh9s]l,DaDtpd&  I

hmGb!aDyd,vfkjdsPhDqhaDmgh9bed,v!ouJfkaqhmb,Y
 jdl,u9D	SV	SG GS M{VW`!	VRM"GMPTRVXWJ  ~hm(DaDmdff#gh9s|W,QR6SGS KUT	VXW`S/ORQ	SGVXK/SfkuJ9d`b

  Po  ]fkaD}d91jGa{l!ja{b u9Dbeh4fkjd'mpG}4Ud,v h9s	aDmGbkfku9m1fkaDuJfkaDhmGb aqf vkd,fkpv!mGb~u9mGyfkjGd'mpG}gw
Ud,v=h9sfkaD}zd`b=fkjGuJfDaDmGd`b% $Jw!H,h9s W,QR6SGS KUT	VW,S/ORQ	SGVXK/SaDDvkd,xUd`uJf,I
 jdl,u9DDb&XW@W`SGR(']5u9mGy6S 	K/X('~hm({aDmd`b5%$u9mGyH,gh9sW,QX/6SGS U
K TRVXW,S/ORQ	SGVKS
 
fkuJ9d   	        	 5fkaD}zdd`u9ljb!aDmGl3dfkjdBbka*),dh9s+'aDb   	  ,      	  I
 jdl,u9DK/L1MPORQ	S KUTRVXW,SO	Q	SVXK/SXhmz{aDmd#ff-&h9s6W`QR/6SGS KUTRVXW,SO	Q	SVXK/SBfkuJ9d`b     
 
fka{}zd9I
 jd l,u9DW,QR6SGS KUT	VXW`S/ORQ	SGVXK/SU    hmcDaDmGd|ff.fkuJ9d`b   	 	  	 UfkaD}d aqsXaDf=aDb=l,u9l!jGd`y6I
/1032

fi46587:9ff;<>=@?:A39B76CEDF?G8H:5:AID*AKJ8A3DLH:GNM!O,P!J8Q!O,JP,9ff7<RMBSTA3O,9ffUVCE9BAIQWP,DLX1O,D*5:H8A

Y[Z,\]3\^_1]`\1affb"c*d,\feg%h%i3jgk_1^TlmnToTp qq rtsvuwlq:xmvquyr:q{z`|%}1\~ z`c*\&|1e3e`c*d[z`Z|%z|1b*b|1b*b*eyzR_
lmyn:oTp qq rtsuylq:xmvquwr8qt,B|%]3\|13Z,\f ^@\|1e`e`\z`Z|%zz`Z\d!t\]E_1^d,\fcLffZ!t_1]3e
 \]b*c*W,\c*eK|_ffdeRz`|1d!zk|1dz`Z|%zEz`Z,\d!8{t\]K_1^_ff  _ffd,\fd!z`e  \]Kb*c"!,\c*eE|1b*eR_|_ffdeRz`|1d!za
z`Z,\fdf~`WI\c*b*btc*d\\f|%}1\kz`Zc*e|1e3e`  z`c*_ffdc*dz`Z,\k^_ffb*bL_c*d,  ]`_W_1^
\K8]3e`ze`Z,_Vz`Z|%z&z`Z,\z`c"\_1^|1b"b:d,_ffd,i|13Z,\f|1b*b"ezR_lmnToTp qq rtsuylq:xmvquwr8qt>ffc*e
~
N% % I
ff% 
Y[Z\  ]`_W_1^wc*e&Wc*dz`c*_ffd_ffdz`Z,\keRzR]38z`,]`\_1^+z`Z,\@R_ffc*dBzR]3\\1
Kf3ff b*c"!,\KwZ8|1e_ffdbL_ffd,\{d,\fcLffZ!t_1]&1ff
 c*d,\gff
,_W\fed,_1z\W\f,zR\|1d
z`Z\z`c*\_1^|
e`c*d,ffb*\d,_ffdi|13Z\f
|1b*bzR_
lfmnTo:p q8q rTsuylfq:xvmquyr:qT1vc"e+~`W%   I  I  \f|h,a1z`Z,\]`\&|%]`\&d,_E_1]`\
z`Z8|1d  % I  d_ffdi|13Z,\f|1b*b*e{zR_lfmn:oTp qq rtsuylqTxvmvq8uyr:qT1IYZ,\zR_1z`|1b@z`c*\_1^
d_ffdi|13Z,\f6|1b*b*e[c"e&z`Z,\fd
  I ~`1 "%  ~`1  3  + "%  I
Zc*3Zc"e\f!8|1b zR_~`W%     @t\f|1eR\ {c*e[|e`8eR\z&_1^wW
 c*d\KW+Z|1e_ffd8bL_ffd,\kd\fcLffZBt_1]&ff%a,z`Z,\ke`zR]`\\k_ffd!z`|1c*de_ffdb*z`Z,\kb*c"!,\K>YZ,\]`\i
^_1]`\1a
~`%    ~ 
N1    I
ff 
IT%f(%{t b*c*W,\W+Z|1e_1]`\z`Z|1d_ffd\{d,\fcLffZ!t_1]f
   _ffeR\
z`Z|%z
^_1]
eR_ff\
Ta
z`Z,\
z`c*\
_1^
lfmnTo:p q8q rTsuylfq:xvmquyr:qT,!W_ffdb"c*d,\Egffc*e

|1b"b

d_ffdi|13Z,\f

|1b*b*e

zR_

~&
N1  I
B 
@  \f|Waz`Z,\z`c*\_1^|1b*bd_ffdi|13Z,\f|1b*b"e{zR_Nlmyn:oTp qq
z`Z\fd
   3  ~`  %  %   


R

_ffeRz|1e3e`c*d]3\f,]3e`cL1\k|1b"b*e|%]`\{|1IZ,\f
Zc*3Z]3\f\fezR_

e3c*d\ 

~`ff     

  a|1dz`Z,\fdzR_

rtsuylq:xmvquwr8qt>ff{c*e


~ 
 N%    I

  
ff
ff
   


`

_ffe`z_1^+d,_ffdi|13Z\f]`\f,]Ie`cL1\k|1b*b*e


~&
%    
  
ff
ff 


~
N1    
B 

e3c*d\ke`,8zR]`\\k_ffde`c*e`z`e_1^b*c*W,\K1|1d8z`Z,\{e`zR]`\\fe[,  Z,\]`\{
 
3TW>V I	(
%&('*),+.-*-

 
fffiIT(

/,021(%-*32&(-*1(/,-(465 87 5 #9 
:.;	<

!!

"	(
ff	#$$!

V



fi=?>A@BDCFEHGJI

KLNM,OPLRQTSUVOPL8M.WTXZY$S\[]S(^JQJWZYP_TL`O^JQJQJaFQJbNYPaFcNL`S.dfehgiejlklm
~ zJx#aFQTLy(R{hS(}PYP}
esurljkJk

n]oqpreskltquvkJpinAklw?xFaFQJL`yTz|{hS(}PYP}

~P, YPaFcNL.TM.QJWxFaFQJLy(aF}[]S(^JQJW[HXYP_JL{hS(}$YS.diM.xFxQTS(Q{sM.{_JL8W{sM.xFxF}Y$S

n]oqpreskltquvkJpinAk T y2U_JaF{_aF}
   

~

~

   

2

2v


   ,  
}PaFQA{hLDD _TLsOPLsdS.OPL.TYP_TLDYPaFcLS.desgie8jkAm
n]ovpre8kltquvkJprnlkaF} ~
(
P
?_AaF}`aF}RM.xF}PSYP_TL}$AM.{hL{hS(cNlxLhaFYXS.dYP_JL\OPLsYP^JOQTL8Wff}aFQJ{hLYP_JLM.WJWAaYPaS(QS.d?L8aYP_TLsONM
~ zYPaFcNL.

QTSWTLS.OM.QM,O{Y$SYP_TL`YPM,.L8}
DAA|rl*



?P.,
JS.OM.xFxv\Jy|\M.QJWvJ_TL8QJ{hL.AliA
J$,T,8
 ^TJ]S(}$LRYP_JM,Y|lM.QJW*r_TL8QYP_TL8}$LLhaF}PYP}ffM.QAW}P^J{_YP_JM,Y|R

RM.QJW

ffS.OPLsS.LsOffM.QAWJ_TL8QJ{hL.Ali
A,Rs	*
 ^TJ]S(}$LRYP_JM,Y`lM.QJW*iA\?_TL8QYP_TL8}$LLhaF}PYP}M.QJW}P^A{_YP_JM,Y|ffRM.QJW
VAZS.OLsS.LsO8v`Vl?_JaF}xL8M.WJ}Y$SVyM.QJW]_TL8QJ{hL.]VyM.QJW
y_TLsOPLsdS.OPL.AN*
l.,
JS.OM.x#xvM.QJW*AL8aFYP_TLsOD"S.OdS.O}$S(cNL^JQJaFH^TLDL8QA{hL.ldS.OM.x#xvM.QJW
*JL8aFYP_TLsOlrS.Orl
Hff

qR((,,Ts(,ff|hl,h(#	|Th,
	fiffl$Thh	h

 D?

l h

fi   s

y



ff



DAA
z,?KL|_JM8.L`ffy|lKL`M.xF}$S_AM8.LDYP_JM,Y?dS.O}$S(cLD^JQJaFH^TL_TLsOPLsdS.OPL.Ay
Hdi*YP_TL8Q
Y$S`





RM.QJW 

yKLYP_TL8Qff_JM8.LR



f*U_AaF{_xL8M.WJ}

 aFQJ{hL`|dS.OM^JQJaFH^TLDrM.QJW}aFQJ{hL 

y]ULN_JM.L

Dff
 M.QAWJ_TL8QJ{hL.A
Hff!

 #"$ff%$ 
   T	,l.,T 8s 
H.,s,ffh &


,
+
(
k
'
q

j
J
k
*
p
)




T	,l.,T
	H,.`h.h

S.OPLsS.LsO8lUL`UaFxFxlOPLsdLsOY$SYP_TLDaFQJ}PYPM.Q2YPaFM,YPaFS(QJ}aFQk('qjkJp-)  

,+ fM.}YP_TL/.sLsOPSLhHY$L8QJ}aS(QJ}

aFQJ}PYPM.Q2YPaFM,YPaFS(QJ}aFQ
?_JLdS(xFxFSUaFQJbRxFL8ccMNaF}fUaFYP_OPL8}$]L8{hY?Y$SYP_TLDM.xFb.S.OaYP_Jc

0213

sVT

a#QiaFb(^TOPLz8H

S.diYP_TL

fi465798%:;=<?>9@A876BC$>(DE959@CF@HG@ACIE9DKJMLONMGPMLOG(NO8%7(;QJR@ALO8%S#B8@PfiNOCIT2LOCF59E@

U?VfiWXWKY[Z]\_^,`ba,cd`baecfgh9i2`jglk
h6k^H`mna/i
oqpk2cgj`mfrgshutvgIp2wncQayx
z2{}|admfii
~
a/`mna^ek
osoIk
|_ghMp^ek
cae~
aec
h9kMaHgh!`mna/Htvjp%cimXi
hae~
aecgshO,`i
h`jgli2`jglk
hgh(-
,
x }
zfij_Ai
h9
 ]gi
h}=ghO`i2h`jgji%`jgjk
h|}mnaecQai
cQai2oso*`mOai%`k
fi%OaAi
cgshMpgsh`mnaHtvlp2cQimckk2`ba
i%`*v
yHUVnW[W[Y[Z
O/M2Ffi(((,I%%(QQA(,(/2(H2A

Hieaiea





FI
}OnO 

 i
ea, FFFQeA2$bOnO  ( j(- -Q=Ms(-
2 (-H%_29- *A2% (/(2eIO%F 
 i
eaHQ,fi6`jcwa Fv22(nb(fiO  O
dO/(2eI(%F 
 i
eaQQ,}^ei
oea
2eIO%F 

F2X2QbOnO 

v#=2 2(

O



h9
w(`jgs~2a/,`ba=
 OnO/dI(FFOA 
 ((%Q(
O/(A2eAbO%F(22AAFF
 i
ea/,9

F22(ObOfi(  O



 2 

-A

9-H
222%

(-22%

2(

O

2((
 X(-H%

(2Os2A   Oe 6(-2

 d !OF((,I%!fi2OF y = (,2    
6     

   2(

 

F(,

 d 
 OF((,I%MM2Oe b_jb OA%FF( 
 2O --  
   2((O,2    jb_j}
 /    dOeA   
O
Q%
(
AFOF!(FF    OF((,I%M
2OAFe%2  F_
 2  b(Q2MF
I%  Oee22  (Qv2  bFQ2
I% 
 i
eaHQ,O F22Qb(fiO  dO  FOeeA,nQ(F%2Q% *}6(-2 Oe
 FuA(F2  2( _]
 d O(((,I%MM2OAFe *  OeAes22  #v  ]   _





 d O!F((,I%MM2OAFe j= 2(M -u fi j*b
j_? (,2   j_  F,   * 9
 (O( 2
j_



 d (F((,I%Mfi2(Fe2 * F2  bF(2F
F%d(e  
O

Q%u

FOKF =] e2FFO  9 vl(-2l \/`k
ffi QlQ d

,nQ((O2A   X(-2   dF6%(IQeA2s22 
Q% F \`k
fM Q  
 F(, \`k
fM Qbu
  ?OI2(,fiQ(AI%(QO2  
(Q2MF
I% 

fi


 	





ff


fi


fi


fi
! "$#%#&'#&'(*),+-#."/+10 23
46587:9;<%7:9=?>@:=BADCFEHGJIKffIMLNO;P<%7:9M=Q<:=?7	>RMAS;5;AUTV;5<W7:T5-7:;TX7:;Y>Z5<\[];Y7:98@:=B<W^\=B_7	7W>]7:9M=`_>Z<W7,RJa5_7:;Y>Z5
bdc NdeXfgL bJh,iffjffk'jfflmj6nUi [o9=?@:= c Ndef*L bJh,i TX@:=mTVVpTX7W>ZAS<qTX^^\=BTX@r;P5MsU;5t7:9M=*u'u]v,wds@rTX^.9x@r>->7W=ByTX7
hfiz
{ 9=8^@:>>R|;<~};5ya_7:;>Z5>Z5t7:9M=<W7W@ra_7:aM@:=8>Rfi z
'$L?mff$L? h ;<TSVY=BTXR5M>1yM= z
 XL?8K h ;<TSV;7W=?@rTVw5M>1yM= z { 9M=B5O	q bJh,i- O%  	%bJh,irq EHGJIKffIMLN bJh,iffz
 XL?8KWK hx N*;<T5xT5y1w5M>1yM= z { 9M=B5x.	' bJh,i8 EGIKffILN bJh,iffz
 XL?8KWKWK hx XLB*;<T5D>@Ww5>yM= z { 9M=B5tO	q bJh,iq EGI1KffIMLN bJh,iffz
KffI.XNG8LN\ h ;P<T5M>1yM=8[o;Y7:9D_ff9;VyM@r=B5 z
 a^^\>Z<W=q7:9TX7]O	q bJh%difi EHGJIKffIMLN bJh%di RJ>@=BT_r9_r9;PVy h% >R hfiz
`GffLN~XGJWrBNGeXI. 4RHEHGJIKffIMLN bJh,i C7:9M=B5x.	' bJh,iffz
 a^^\>Z<W=q7:9TX7oEHGJIKffIMLN bJh,iffz { 9M=B5Dhfiz
  ;X5L?_8=mKx h ;<';T<TyM5=B_T>Z5AyM^\w5M>Z><:TXy}= Vz =gu'u]vC\7:9M=mTX7W>ZAS<q7:9TX78TX^^\=BTX@8;5x=BT_r9 h% Aga<W7q}\=*y;P<J6>Z;P5F7 z
{ 9M=?@:=?RJ>@:=C%A*a<W7]9T=m7:9M=*RJ>@rA    [o9=?@:=*  ;<]7:9M=g^@:>$W=B_7:;Y>Z5t>RQ>Z5x7:9M=gTX7W>ZAU<
;P5 h%z >@r=?>=?@BC[Q=Aga<W79TB=D  h% RJ>@m=BT_r9 6z 47<:a1_=B<g7:9M=B57W><:9M>/[7:9TX7
 O	q bJh%i R>@x<W>ZA= z 7:9M=;5ya_7:;Y>Z5
  O	' bJh%iffz  aM^^\>Z<W=7:9TX7t 
9-^O>7:9=B<:;<?CM   EGI1KffIMLN bJh  iffz  ;5_=q  h  CM[=A*a<W7~7:9M=B5D9TB=m  B bJh  iQ]tnb   iffz
u]>[VY=?78p}\=m7:9M=m@:=B<:aV7'>R@:=?^VPT_?;5Ms7:9;<8  ;5H[o;Y7:9H<W>ZA=  O	q bJh%diffz { 9M=B5
  h <:;P5_=  h% }mp=BASASTm z >@:=?>/=?@BC17:9M=]_>Z<:7`>R	  A*a<:7}\=oVY=B<:<fi7:9T5S7:9M='_>Z<W7
>R	}	=BASASTg z { 9M=?@:=?RJ>@:=C-_?T55M>7`}\=o;5UEGI1KffIMLN bJh,i []9;_r9U;<T_>Z5-7W@rTy;_7:;>Z5 zfi =
7:9=B5_>Z5_?Vay=87:9TX7o  tO	q bJh%di T5y%C9=B5_=C7:9TX7oxO	q bJh,iffz
  ;X5L?_8=qKWK h h ;<CT[5D=8>A*@Wwa5<W>7yM9= TBz =h% RJ>@<W>ZA=8_ff9;Vy h% >R hfiz 	=?7  }\=]7:9M=q^@r>$6=B_7:;Y>Z5>R
>Z5D7:9=TX7W>ZAS<o;P5 h%z { 9M=B5 ntb  i  ntb  i C.  h% T5y[Q=9T=>Z5M=>R,7[Q>_?T<W=B<?
 z   xO	q bJh%di  { 9M=B5 ntb  i   B bJh%di }-	=BAUASTUmT5yD[=9T=7[>_?T<:=B<?
b T intb   i8tntb  i `;<`7:9=B5T*?=?@:>m=17W=B5<:;Y>Z5>Rp  T5y%C19M=B5_=CMxO	q bJh,iffz
b } iUntb  i  ntb  i T5-m?=?@:>=17W=B5<:;Y>Z5U>R%  [o;VPV-}\>7:9U=B5F7:T;V h T5yS9T=]T*VY>[=?@
_>Z<:7o7:9T5 z { 9;<~_>Z5F7W@rTy;_7:<oEGIKffILN bJh,i T5yD7:9M=*_?T<W=;<;PA^\>Z<:<:;Y}V= z
 z  x O	q bJh%di   7:9M=;5ya_7:;Y>Z59F^\>7:9M=B<:;<BC ~H EGI1KffIMLN bJh%diffz  ;5_=  h% C
7:9;<]AS=BT5<o7:9TX78  B bJh%io  nb  iffz { 9=?@:=?R>@r=C.7:9M=g?=?@:>=7W=B5<:;Y>Z5x>R`T5FD  ;5
O	q bJh%di [o;VVp}\>7:9x=B5-7:T;V h T5y9T=ST<rASTVVY=?@8_>Z<W787:9T5H z { 9;<]_>Z5-7W@rTy;P_7:<
EGI1KffIMLN bJh,i T5yD7:9=_?T<W=;<;PA^\>Z<:<:;Y}V= z
ff

fix.Z.rFxq..ff'rY.-M--MMZWFOrMZqFffMYM.
\rrX.D::X

 ff


	fiff "!#$	&% (' )*+,
-/.0021345678
	fiff,:9;<! =">#41?3 1A@BC@D1?EF! G3=H
KJ LMNH
O EP3Q1RPRS1@T3QUWVYX"Z?Z[6?\W,

I

HJ ff

I
] ^ N_L ] a`Q1cb8341Zd5`e	&% (' )+*H
- . 002134e67#`f	g% (' )*=,h9;#i4.3#3 1@D">j67U21Akcl67Y`f	gff57,fmnV
Xo"Z[Z[6d\W 6cRPRpEF!346c!WEP67ES1!3DEP!qff5c_6"kc5 r36cZ[s+134=/@8tEPsuvEP3D6cRP341w s+13D1c
`x, O  =bu=a1cbcy6c!>Y`&Zw.3486kcz {3u6cZd{s+134=,

 ff

HJ('ff )+=,

O EF3|RS"6c>}41q
	&%

~ztt<WpA/

W

O  }s=6cRPRD41;
1!$RFEP! q v67c"3q?^w{EPZdc,T1c4}67d36"k/EP! Ge }s+1Zd0t.4">s+1343dEP3
"334"!WEP6cRx3EP!s+wEP36[Gcb670t2! 1cT6q4b=c, O  =b=1cbc@8ES 1. 8 <s "sfi1!&RFEP! z w1c:2
 {s+131cx6?! 1(>zZ[6"V}U2zs+1Zd0t. 4">Zd1cbr6c!Y1!ts+<3EP!ts+56?! 1(>zs=6c!#6"kcwZd1cbzt6c!Y1! 
0t67b"!W=,
O Qs=6cRFRW41za"ffWoffaffp^x:1!dRFEP! n67c"3D[Jcff5c^tJ +wEFZdQ@8 =bD Q+(0pRP6c!6
ES1!#EF3QGESkc"!#U2"RS1A@z, O  541c6cREPZdr1cx z+/4bu6cs+ES1!6cRPGc1cbuESZEP3 "!fi[J7ff5c^tJ  ,
a"ffWoffFff^8EP3D3EPZ[EFRP67b:41po[+ s+=0Q67D 6cZ[1.!D1c@D1cb?> 1!T67Q"6csuY! 1/> 
#EP3N>ES=b"!W=, O 1zU21.!t><tEP3N6cZd1.!W=@DQtbu341cUt3=bkc67:1cb:6c!WV!1(> QY@8EP )++5LB
 
6c!>#EP3suEFRP>Y2H 4
Jcff57tJJcff78JW


r

O EF3Qa1RPRP1@83QU2"s=6c.34cH
?EP8BEP3d6c!K6c!t>/C! 1/> c_ "!ffpt7EF3 #s=67b4"3EP6c!K0b1/>.s+1c6cRFRffptcpw6c!>
"!s+ctES3s=67b>EP!6cRPEPCVqs=6c!t! 1cU2rRS"33|6c!# {s=67bu>EF!6cRPESV[1cN6c!V#ff57tt6c!>

d

?EPfiEP3D6c!?1cbC! 1(>cW "!}ff5c:EF3: 5.!ES1!?1c6cRPRoff:ff5ct5 c<)/Nut4
6c!t> "!s+ctEP3s=67bu>EP!t6cRPESCVvs=6c!! 1cU2rRS"336c!Y {s=67b>EP!6cRPEPCV?1c6c!WVYff57t, 4
O  =bu=a1cbc {s+1Zd0t. 67EP1!Y1c:ffpt7D67c"3
v?J|ff5cJ[EPZdfiEPEP3q6c!6c!> C! (
1 >c|@8EPsEP3v6cRP341
 &3uES=1cz&s=67b4"3uEP6c!
0tb1(>t.s+
ff57:L

ff5ct
Ac ""=u7
v?JWTa:JJ7ff5cJ  EPZdEPt#EP3N6c!d1cbC! 1(>c@8EPsEP3pi4.t34Et">6c3:1RPRS1A@83=H
[{.!ES1!v1cC@D1q3=3|@8ESY3EP="3;6c!>Y67c"3r[finEPZ[c,
[41qs+1Zd0t. 4<ff5cD@DzZw.3402=b1cbuZh[JFWo_|J|.!ES1!}1c02=bu67ES1!t3=,
&Jffpt7t8JwJcff57J(1cb86cRPRYEP!&FWo:,
*"pa24(t#}7Ac*Ptn8NN7A4=:*D+7"c
pxux7nucc*P7 _*"c/S7Ac*P oF D*
 7 
	

fi
fiff

fi!"#%$"&$"'()&$*+,-().0/$*214357698;:=<?>@'ACBD:"E%FHG7IKJMLN5O3PC:=<?>QEE143576H8;:=<?>QE R>S'TU$"fiVWA*$
+XA*YWfiZ$*$"X[7$"'K()Z$"X;\]T_^`aIKP?81%b7P?10I!b14I=cNP?8H'A&$"]T
d

BD:"EF2G7IKJMLN5O3Pi:=<?>QEE143576H8-:=<?>&E R >j

e%fhg
VQZ<lk]T$*]AQXmTk9'KTn$"poHo2q?rtsX;.vuwYifi'Ax]k/+,]A&$*y
d

BD:"EF2G7IKJMLN5O3Pi:=<?>QEE143576H8-:zu>fiE R >

e%fhg
A"'T+,lEC143576H8-:=<?>{E}|UE~14357698:zu>vE?!mXTM`Tkn<'T$"_oHo2q?rtsX;.uwY R"

]k/+'KTs$"'A

z/"$"]#VWs$y
E14357698;:zu>fiE R d

BD:"EMFHG7IKJMLN5O3Pi:=<?>fiE>

e-fg


E;14357698:zu>fiE RBm:zU>


Bm:"E14357698;:zu> R

EU>

-
 X;"VQ'A"#YN:zCk7Y}>Y?:]->Y&;0M"]aH=,Dzw7Yo2"$"r2-[[XTkO#2(DA"$*kX(aY
 s-[#qWY#q/;*'VxX;X#pY4:]->Y?T]/$*X[T$"['A*$~i+,-(p^0'TX;$"'-TX[^4]T+(DX;\U+'+/'$"A
XTkX$"X;"s$m$*XTA"[X;$*m'KTq?

 


HoYT&;=M;v_=*C;2!

 =*==0YCM$*$*.7y}hVfiVfiVY+,^0[YT+A"/OY]k/0hVfiVfiVH
W-[[K'TA#%Y%Y#



hx-A*$*# 

W



+A'A"+XAYM$"(D[Y

Yw:]>Y@x~Q4y2T~fi'+2-'kA  X;^w][i.[-A"'-TAY

Tv&]hiHHH2*-;#..NY-MY


X;"VQ'+#ZpYU:]->Yvk][rt^XA*]kk'KX;s-T-A"'Aa/A'Ts+X/A"X[T$V\AYT&];!;
0,0z;0;S!


 ;]],",4);{H,z ;0!,0=  2#..7YMY

X;"VQ'+#7YC:]->Y[s-'+X[~T$"'-T+,-Tk'$"'-TX[S'Tk.w]Tk]T+,yQi".w"$"']AHXTkX;..['r
+X;$"'-TAYWH,z ;4!M,4,#N4:r->#w%Y


X;"VQ'+#2YZ:];X%>YW-().0'['Tslk'+,]A]yA*$*/+,$"/",rt^XA"]kX;.."-X+7YTZZY?
X;..4]X;Y


X;"VQ'+#pYO:]^4>Y?2$"'[']'Tsk'+,2T-TrA*$*/+,$"/X[.".w"$"']AC'TDA"$*/+,$"/",rt^0XA*]kk'X;s-T;r
A'AYNT_x*]";=M=20,0z;0;Qv;ha&=002pz0K#..7Y
Y



X;"VQ'+#ZpY#Q9-[kA*](D'Kk$#HYp:]M>Y9T$"

][X;$"'-T^w$VW]T\;X;..X+X[+/[K/AaXTk

."^X;^'[K'A*$"'+m"]XA*-T'TsYTx*]";=M;_=0=
9z ;40,=}M07Hh#..7Y7,%0]	Y

 ;]],",0;?0,,t;=z=


fiff!"$#&%('*)&+#,-.+#/"0*1#,243.%,fi3	25%&#/"6)87:9<;'*#,fi)>=?')A@0	2CB';D&2?E8F')G'*)BC25H#,%F1IJ
K.KL

fiMONQP:RTS.UWVYX:Z*R[PO\^]XJ_Q`:N:Z]aZ8bQZ*]c`:_edgf1hgbQigf1bJh1RTPJUd[jZ*f1RTkl\^R[Zih1]cm	f1]aN:`QZ

n^oAprq6satu1v	wQxzycw{}|~voAp*,w:1y!C	gy0zTasat^t<o	Jro	Jv<(qY	pryCOfi*r	/g	C>! 
z	H&A:A?Ar:fiA8H Y<&A:Q(:fi808(Dw1JFy1		.	1y
n^oAprq6satu1v	wQxzycw{}|pr.Ao	w>y!C		Ty?QcTscrs1rvp*Qtr1prvsa1v[Qo	vJsaoATJTrsa
	YJsartp*v<vfi[v<	v[vy5Cfi**A/AC	QQ(fi:	H&A:AzA.*	
::afiz8HT:fifiwJJyQ	.:<Ty
n^oAprq6satu1v	w1xycw1{|prDo	wQ>yC	T	y?$u1v0vvt		Qrv<proArsaTJTru1v8tTQcv1scW	F1v
:o	vJsoAT1Trsa<y5OC.**AgAC<Jz	H&A:A?Ar:fiAO8H Y<&AQ(<//
:fi808(DwJFyQ	y
1vav<v<pwQ1yFC		Tyx0o	rrJQrscT,Qo	v6y^fiH <&A:(cg<:<w[	wFT:	y
1vcv<v<p.wY1y$C		Ty1t<Jrs1TJpr	QoA:cvQsaoAT1Tv<yC8o	rtu1v<pwYycw$YTJrTcv	wycw{
Jv>av<v<pwJy4HJ<yw$rT	/g	/Oe[,0A<rHT:fifiwQy!:TgyFO	prTo	o	1/
o	J|JQasaruJv<p*<w[CJtAycw1o	OoAv<1wo	asc	p*Jsoy
1v6cv<v<pwgJycwgo	trq	prruwxzy[ycw{$vscv<p.wgyC		Ty!uJoAp*o	tv<p*sasa1JsaoATJTvo	Jrv<y
^fiH <&A:(cg<:<wF[F&DWTw?T		y
1vcv<v<pw1ycw{saasao	w:8y^y4C	T	yn^saoATJTrsa1zQcrscQcvo	Jar<yG^fiH <&AQ(:fiw
 4C.wT:Ay
n8vt*ugv<pw?yC		TyYTQp*o	sag1v<(qY	pr<yCuQoAQscpr1w~yHyw:T<c1r	HC8fiH HA
:(cg<:<wJJyJTA.		y	TuJsaav<o	JOTJ<y
n8vt*ugv<pw^ycw{n8vt*ugv<pw^xyGC		Typ*JtrJprv(1p*sc	vo	c		p*scruQ	pp1ruo	sa[vQo	Jtv	y
^fiH <&A:(cg<:<w	Tw!Ay
n8vt*ugv<pwFycw{|~voAp*&wJy?C		TyzFprv<vt<aQv<p*sa1/	pGtTJrp*o	sag^Jv<(qY	pryz8fiH HAQ(<//
:fiw  	w:		.		y
n8prvrrav<pw>ycw6{ JoAp  JoApwxzyzC	A[y |1rs1 ru1v|p*	Qcv Tc	v<pOYo	t* saru1vn8p*sa	v<p
voA YTgvrJo	~YTgprTF	~ruJvx?$yC**A:080A.Ae[,0A<r
6r<AJg	wJy<T.:	y
vYx6	v<w?8ycwoAp  Qsa<w4|!ycw{ 6J*sa1.q0scrt*uw~eyC		Ty|prv<v<prp*saJJsaoAT1TrvoAQJtrscTy
 JCAJT.HHAJAQfi(>4eA	YA~ff
fi<H&fiw  &TwA	.ATy
:JoAro	uwfiycw{n8vt*ugv<pwJyC		Ty!n^saoAT1Trs1prv<v(JvtTTroAQcv8t<scp*t<JscryCC.**AgA
6
  (*<Q>Q(<:THHAA
 1AQ?	<<<:^	^fiH <&A:(cg<:z 8 T
OTgprvo	&
w G1v<vtAw:o	Jo	Joy
QJoAro	uwfi>ycw{n8vt*ugv<pwJyC		TyFx0v<o	aQoArscT	p*Qtr1p*o	1QoApo	v<p*	pJpr	QoA:saasarst
p*vo	TJsa1	
 0$vrJar6TvJt*uQoAprt<scp*t<Qscr<y6CrAg	>A[ ?Ar:fi	
~:fi,A/:H^fiH <&A:(cg<: 8(DwJJFy1		Ay
1	pr:J<wyn>ycw{ 1vav<v<pw1y$C		Ty1t<Jrs1ru1vx?$yeC rAg	OC:[
z	H&A:A?Ar:fiA8H Y<&A:Q(:fi808(Dw1JFy	.:	y
1	pr:J<wJyQn>ycw:{

1vcv<v<pwQJyFC		TyAgC
<cA	yOC |prv*<y
 !

fi"$#&% ')(+*,.-

/103254	0678:9;7=<?>@0AB6CD7ffE	9FGHIffJK9	L14NM+OQP.6SR T0U:V3Rff4.WYXY6AMZ4X[\P.6RP&AB]ffABXSM;Rff4^AC;]R6M;XS_&Oa`bR6@U.M+AB]ff4.RffWSM+W9
c 4edfghjiikBlnmoBp^gYqsrtuwv1r7	P.Pw9wGGxffy zGGGG^{|M+C+A457 c XSAC;}9
/1RffC+U&WY~OQM+U	X7{9;7<>0AB6CD7E	91FGHHffK9aA4	z&AWY0UWS}WYXY0OWeLWSM+OQP&C;0ABP.P.6SRffAV_XYR0CZM;0`
60TM+WM;Rff45750C+M;0`.PU&ABXY0^A4&U6S0AWYRff4.MZ4	]ABRff.X0TM+U.04.V30A4.UAV3XSM;Rff4.W9 c 4dfghjiikBlnmoBpgq
b i  lnfYkugBmqi3fSi3mhi^gBmdfjlbmhl+ijpNgq1:mg;ikoi$ifSijpim \ lDgBm  mkQ$i  pgBm.lbmo7P.Pw9
 Gz  JB95{eR6S]ffA4NA	`bOA4.4>	C+M+WS_	06W7 c 4.VB9;7A4{eABXY0R	75AC+M;`bR64.M+A9
81.A4	]	7N19;7<AB6SMZV_	07L:9NFGHH  K9 c .
4 `n06S04&V30M+40C+M;0`N4	0XR6WLP.6RV30U..6AC1]ff.M+U	09
rm  i3fjm  lDgBm  tgfjm  gq1vfffYglb 
  iNi  pgBm.lbmo7ff@FDffK75y z  9
E04&WY045799;7@A	6M;XY~04w7	9;7	<C;0WY04w79FGHHBxK9A 
} 0WSM+A4	P5U.ABXSMZ4	]NM+46S0V	6WM;T0]6ABP_.M+VAC
OQRU	0CZW}C;RVAC5V3RffOP&	XSABXSM+Rff459:ugBs \ lDgBm  @ \  lnp  lDh3p  f  ifB7	7  H zI9
>6R TBA457/9FGHH  K9L	R6OQAC$L14.AC;}WSM+W:R`)RffWYX..4.V3XSM+Rff4.W^`nR6QL{	RV.WSMZ4	]	9 c 4dfYgh 
 gBf b rm  ifm ff lgBm  &Bsg=pjlngmv1r  mke b i ff lhp^X9A.U.06U.AC;077EA459
[yGHH  9
$0M+XY067$)9;7<U	0|)C;0067$E	91FGHIffJK9	Rff.4&U.ABXSM;Rff4.WR`AWSWS.OP&XSM;Rff4[\&AWY0UXY6	XS_?OQAM+4XY04.A4.V30
WS}WYXY0OW>60C+M+OQM+4&AB6S}6S0PR6SX9 c 4edfYghiiSkBlbmop^gqsv1vsv1r7	P.Pw95GI zGII95L1LsL c 9
$0M+XY067)9FGHIffJK9LXS_	0R6}R`U.MZAB]ff4	RffWSM+WN`n6SRffO&6WYXNP.6M+4.VM;P&C+0W9ev1f  l hl  rm  inl;oi3mhi37$ffff7
yffJzHy9
AB6AWSABX79L:9;7U	01)C;0067E	9;7<sAM+OQA457	9FGHHBxK9Rff4XY6M;&	XSM;Rff4&WXYRANXS_	0R6S}R`wU.M+AB]ff4.RffWSM+W9
c 4gBflbmoNg  i3pgq  lbfp  rm  i3fjm  lDgBm  gBf p  ggBmdflbmhl+ijpgq)l  offmg=plnp7P.Pw9
 zI9
_.AV_XY06 7N9;7L14.U	06WS04579;7<~RffC+R 
T M;XSW7@>9FGHH=K9e/C;R&ACRff4.U.M;XSM;Rff4&M+4	]`nR6>6SR&ABM+C+M+WYXSMZV
c 4	`b06S04.V30MZ40C+M;0`0XR6W9 c 4dfg h Ni3m b ugmqifYimhigBm@mhi3f \ lbm  |lnmv1r7wP.Pw9
yG3=zy0ABXYXSC+0)|L:9
PRff_.4579FGHIffJK916U.M+4.ACV3Rff4.U&M;XSM;Rff4.AC`.4.V3XSM+Rff4.W:LU	}4.AOQMZVXS_	0R6S}R`0P&MZWYXY0OQM+VWYXSABXY0W9
u  p  lDgBmlbm|^iShlZpjlgm	il\iqu  moij  mk \ lnp  lDh3pe@  f\.i3f  mk1.==fjp
ik=p3Z77Gxffy zG=	9

  

fiJournal of Artificial Intelligence Research 8 (1998) 1-21

Submitted 8/97; published 1/98

Monotonicity and Persistence in Preferential Logics
Joeri Engelfriet

Vrije Universiteit, Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science
De Boelelaan 1081a, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands

joeri@cs.vu.nl

Abstract

An important characteristic of many logics for Artificial Intelligence is their nonmonotonicity. This means that adding a formula to the premises can invalidate some of the
consequences. There may, however, exist formulae that can always be safely added to the
premises without destroying any of the consequences: we say they respect monotonicity.
Also, there may be formulae that, when they are a consequence, can not be invalidated
when adding any formula to the premises: we call them conservative. We study these
two classes of formulae for preferential logics, and show that they are closely linked to the
formulae whose truth-value is preserved along the (preferential) ordering. We will consider some preferential logics for illustration, and prove syntactic characterization results
for them. The results in this paper may improve the eciency of theorem provers for
preferential logics.

1. Introduction
Over the past decades, many non-classical logics for Artificial Intelligence have been defined
and investigated. The need for such logics arose from the unsuitability of classical logics to
describe defeasible reasoning. These classical logics are monotonic, which means that their
consequence relation (j) satisfies:
8ff; fi; '

: (ff j fi ) ff ^ ' j fi )

(Monotonicity)

This means that whenever we learn new information (') and add this to what we already
know (ff), all the old theorems (fi ) are still derivable. This is clearly undesirable when
describing defeasible reasoning. Therefore, monotonicity is not satisfied by many logics for
Artificial Intelligence.
On the other hand, monotonicity is a very attractive feature from a practical point of
view. When learning new information, we do not have to start all over again, but we can
retain our old conclusions, and focus on deriving possible new ones. Furthermore, when we
have a lot of information, we are allowed to focus on only part of it. Conclusions derived
from this part are then automatically also valid when considering all the information we
have (this is sometimes called local reasoning).
Even though it is clear that we do not want monotonicity to hold in general, it might
be worthwhile to investigate restricted variants of monotonicity. In the past, such variants
have been defined which allow us to keep the old theorems, when either the new information follows from the old premise (this variant is called Cautious Monotonicity by Kraus,
Lehmann, & Magidor, 1990) or its negation can not be derived from the old premise (this
is called Rational Monotonicity by Kraus et al., 1990).

c 1998 AI Access Foundation and Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. All rights reserved.

fiEngelfriet

We will take a somewhat different perspective, and consider two classes of formulae: the
class of formulae that can always be added to a premise without invalidating old conclusions
(we say these formulae respect monotonicity), and the class of formulae which can always be
retained as conclusions, no matter which new information is added to the premise (we say
these formulae are conservative). The advantages of monotonicity sketched above would
still hold when we restrict ' to the class of formulae that respect monotonicity, or when
we restrict fi to be conservative. Whether such classes exist, and what these classes are,
depends of course on the particular nonmonotonic logic considered. We will focus here on
an important class of nonmonotonic logics: the class of preferential logics (Shoham, 1987,
1988). These logics are based on a monotonic logic (such as propositional logic, predicate
logic or modal logic) augmented with a preference order on its models. The nonmonotonic
consequences of a formula ff are those formulae which are true in all models of ff which
are minimal in the preference order among all models of ff (an extensive discussion of
preferential logics is provided by van Benthem, 1989). We will give a formal definition.

Definition 1 (Preferential logic) A preferential logic consists of a language L, a class

of models Mod together with a satisfaction relation j= between models and formulae, and
a partial order  on Mod. A model m 2 Mod is called a minimal model of a formula ff
(denoted m j= ff) if m j= ff and for all models n, if n  m and n j= ff then n = m.
Preferential entailment (j= ) between formulae is defined as follows: for ff; fi 2 L : ff j= fi
if fi is true in all minimal models of ff.

Our presentation uses a partial order, i.e., a reexive, antisymmetric and transitive
relation. Shoham (1987) uses a strict partial order, i.e., an irreexive transitive relation,
with a slightly different notion of minimal model. The presentations can be translated into
each other.
It will turn out that formulae whose truth is preserved when going to more preferred
or less preferred models, play an important role with respect to the two classes of formulae
defined above (the class of formulae that respect monotonicity, and the class of conservative
formulae). We will first give a definition.

Definition 2 (Persistence) Given a preferential logic (L; Mod; j=; ), a formula ff 2 L is
called downward persistent in this logic, if

8m; n 2 Mod : (m j= ff

and n  m) ) n j= ff;

and it is called upward persistent if
8m; n 2 Mod : (n j= ff

and n  m) ) m j= ff:

In the next section, we will introduce some preferential logics to illustrate the material
in the rest of the paper. In Section 3 we will consider formulae that respect monotonicity,
and in Section 4 conservative formulae will be treated. The practical implications of the
results of this paper are discussed in Section 5. Section 6 gives conclusions and suggestions
for further research. Part of the material in this paper appeared in (Engelfriet, 1996b).
2

fiMonotonicity and Persistence in Preferential Logics

2. Some Preferential Logics

In this section we will describe the following preferential logics: Ground S5, Minimal Temporal Epistemic Logic and Circumscription. Since we have already defined preferential
entailment in general, for each logic we only have to give its ingredients, i.e., L; Mod; j=,
and . The preferential entailment relation is then fixed by Definition 1. The first logic we
will consider is Ground S5.

2.1 Ground S5

Ground S5 is a nonmonotonic modal logic for auto-epistemic reasoning, originally proposed
by Halpern and Moses (1985). Their aim was to formalize statements of the form "I only
know '". It allows, for example, to derive that an agent which only knows p, does not
know q. Ground S5 falls into the general scheme of ground nonmonotonic modal logics
(Donini, Nardi, & Rosati, 1997). A lot of interest is devoted to logics of minimal knowledge
(Levesque, 1990; Schwarz & Truszczynski, 1994; Chen, 1997; Halpern, 1997).
Semantically, states in which an agent only knows ', are states in which ' is known, but
otherwise the amount of knowledge is minimal. We will use a modal propositional language
to express the knowledge of the agent, and S5 will be the monotonic logic. We will give a
treatment of Ground S5 slightly different, but equivalent to the one given by Halpern and
Moses (1985).

Definition 3 (Epistemic language) Let P be a (finite or countably infinite) set of propositional atoms. The language LS5 is the smallest set closed under:


if p 2 P then p 2 LS5 ;



if ';

2 LS5

then K'; ' ^ ; :' 2 LS5 .

Furthermore, we introduce the following abbreviations:

'_

 :(:' ^ :

); ' !

 :' _

; M'  :K :'; >  p _ :p; ?  :>:

If every atom occurring in a formula ' is in the scope of a K operator, we call ' subjective.

An example of a subjective formula is :Kp ^ K (q ! p), whereas K (p ^ q) _ s is not
subjective. In the rest of this paper we will only be interested in subjective formulae: they
describe (just) the knowledge and ignorance of the agent.
In the usual S5 semantics, a model is a triple (W; R; ), where W is a set of worlds, R is
an equivalence relation on W and  is a function that assigns a propositional valuation to
each world in W . We may however, in the case of one agent, restrict ourselves to normal S5
models, in which the relation is universal (each world is accessible from every world), and
worlds are identified with propositional valuations (a proof of soundness and completeness
of S5 with respect to these semantics is given by Meyer & van der Hoek, 1995).

Definition 4 (S5 semantics) Let P be a (finite or countably infinite) set of propositional

atoms. A propositional valuation is a function from P into f0; 1g where 0 stands for false
and 1 for true. The set of all such valuations will be denoted by Mod(P ). A normal S5
3

fiEngelfriet

model M is a non-empty subset of Mod(P ). The truth of an S5 formula ' in such a model,
evaluated in a world m 2 M , denoted (M; m) j=S5 ', is defined inductively:
1: (M; m) j=S5 p
, m(p) = 1, for p 2 P
2: (M; m) j=S5 ' ^ , (M; m) j=S5 ' and (M; m) j=S5
3: (M; m) j=S5 :' , it is not the case that (M; m) j=S5 '
4: (M; m) j=S5 K' , (M; m0 ) j=S5 ' for every m0 2 M
We have the following elementary results on subjective formulae. The proofs are straightforward.

Proposition 5 (Subjective formulae)

1. Let ' be a subjective formula. For a normal S5 model M and m1 ; m2 2 M it holds:
(M; m1 ) j=S5 ' , (M; m2 ) j=S5 ':
We define M j=S5 ' if (M; m) j=S5 ' for some, or, equivalently, all m 2 M . The set
of all normal S5 models, sometimes called information states, is denoted by IS.
2. An S5 formula ' is subjective if and only if it is equivalent to a formula of the form
K' with ' 2 LS5.
A subjective formula describes the knowledge of an agent, but we want to formalize that
this is all the agent knows. Therefore we are looking for models in which the knowledge of
the agent is minimal, or in other words, in which the ignorance of the agent is maximal. We
introduce a preference order over information states which favors models with less knowledge. The definition of this ordering is based on the observation that the more valuations
the agent considers possible, the less knowledge the agent has. Indeed, for any propositional
formula ' we have: if M1 j= K' and M1  M2 then M2 j= K'.
Definition 6 (Degree of knowledge) We define the degree-of-knowledge ordering  on
normal S5 models as follows: for M1 ; M2 2 IS : M1  M2 , M1  M2 .
Ground S5 is the preferential logic based on this ordering.
Definition 7 (Ground S5) Ground S5 is the preferential logic with the subjective formulae of LS5 as its language, IS as its class of models, the satisfaction relation of Proposition 5
and the ordering of Definition 6. We will denote preferential entailment (as defined in Definition 1) of Ground S5 by j=GS5 .
The reader can now check that, for instance, Kp j=GS5 :Kq. The (unique) minimal
S5 model of Kp consists of all propositional valuations in which p is true, and this indeed
contains a model in which q is false. The entailment relation is nonmonotonic since Kp ^
Kq 6j=GS5 :Kq. Another example illustrates the minimality of the agent's knowledge: Kp _
Kq j=GS5 :(Kp ^ Kq).
Let us define a consequence relation j by ' j if K' j=GS5 K . Then it turns out
that this is the consequence relation of Halpern and Moses (1985), apart from the fact that
they only defined it for premises which have a unique minimal model. Premises with a
unique minimal model are called honest. To give an example, the formula Kp is honest,
but Kp _ Kq is not: both the S5 model consisting of all valuations in which p is true, and
the model with all valuations in which q is true, are minimal models.
4

fiMonotonicity and Persistence in Preferential Logics

2.2 Minimal Temporal Epistemic Logic

In Ground S5, we are only able to express something about `all the agent knows' at a
particular instant. We will extend this logic in such a way that we are also able to say
something about the changing knowledge of the agent over time. Originally, this extended
logic was intended as a means of specifying nonmonotonic reasoning processes and of reasoning about their properties (Engelfriet & Treur, 1994, 1996; Engelfriet, 1996a). The idea
is that a temporal formula describes the nonmonotonic inferences the agent has to perform
during the course of a reasoning process (analogously to the use of temporal logic for specifying computer processes). But these inferences should also be the only cause of increases
in the agent's knowledge. Therefore, we again have to minimize the agent's knowledge, but
now over time (analogously to the use of minimization for dealing with the frame problem
in temporal logics for describing action and change, Shoham, 1988). To this end, we will
temporalize the epistemic language, epistemic models and the degree-of-knowledge ordering.
In order to describe past and future we introduce temporal operators P; H; F; G and
2, denoting respectively \sometimes in the past", \always in the past", \sometimes in the
future", \always in the future" and \always". We do not want to describe the agent's knowledge of the future and past, but the future and past of the agent's knowledge. Therefore,
temporal operators are not allowed to occur within the scope of the epistemic K operator.

Definition 8 (Temporal epistemic language) The language
closed under:


if ' 2 LS5 then ' 2 LTEL ;



if ff; fi 2 LTEL then ff ^ fi; :ff; Pff; Fff 2 LTEL .

LTEL

is the smallest set

Again the abbreviations for _; !; > and ? are introduced, as well as:

Gff  :F (:ff); Hff  :P (:ff) and 2ff  Hff ^ ff ^ Gff:
If in the first clause we restrict ourselves to subjective formulae, we get the set of subjective
TEL formulae.

In the rest of this paper we will be interested in subjective TEL formulae since they
describe how the knowledge of the agent is changing over time. Based on the set of natural
numbers (N) as ow of time, and normal S5 models as formalization of states in a temporal
model, the following semantics is introduced for temporal epistemic logic (TEL):

Definition 9 (Semantics of TEL) A TEL model is a function M : N ! IS . The truth
of a formula ' 2 LTEL in M at time point t 2 N, denoted (M; t) j= ', is defined inductively
as follows:

1:
2:
3:
4:
5:

(M; t) j= '
(M; t) j= ' ^
(M; t) j= :'
(M; t) j= P'
(M; t) j= F'

, M(t) j=S5 ', if ' 2 LS5
, (M; t) j= ' and (M; t) j=
, it is not the case that (M; t) j= '
, 9s 2
such that s < t and (M; s) j= '
, 9s 2
such that t < s and (M; s) j= '

N
N

5

fiEngelfriet

A formula ' is true in a model M , denoted M j= ', if (M; 0) j= '. A TEL model M
is called conservative (or a TELC model) if for all s < t 2 N : M(s)  M(t), with the
ordering  of Definition 6. The set of TELC models is denoted by TCIS.

Note that the above definition is in principle ambiguous: a formula like Kp ^ Kq is
an S5 formula which can be interpreted according to the first semantic clause, but it can
also be seen as a conjunction, to be interpreted according to the second clause. As the
interpretation of the conjunction (and the same holds for negation) is the same in S5 as in
TEL, this ambiguity is harmless.
We will briey explain the reason we have defined M j= ' if (M; 0) j= '. Later on, we
will make the general assumption on preferential logics that the language contains negation,
and that m j= :' if and only if m 6j= ' (Assumption 1). If we define M j= ' if (M; t) j= '
for all t 2 N, then this assumption would not hold for TEL. The two definitions can be
translated into each other, since (M; 0) j= ' if and only if (M; t) j= :P > ! ' for all t 2 N
and (M; t) j= ' for all t 2 N if and only if (M; 0) j= ' ^ G'. This is also one of the reasons
we gave a slightly different presentation of Ground S5 (using subjective formulae).
In conservative models, the propositional knowledge of an agent can only increase in
time. We will restrict ourselves to these models, i.e., an agent can not forget or revise its
(propositional) knowledge. Indeed, for a propositional formula ' and a TELC model M , if
(M; t) j= K' then (M; s) j= K' for all s > t. This restriction can be made when the agent
is reasoning about a fixed (non-changing) situation, and we are abstracting from particular
implementation details (such as the use of backtracking implementations for nonmonotonic
logics). We now extend the ordering and minimal consequence relation to TELC models.
The ordering is extended in a pointwise fashion.

Definition 10 (Minimal temporal epistemic logic)
1. We extend the degree-of-knowledge ordering to TELC models by defining
MN ,

for all s 2 N : M(s)  N (s):

2. Minimal temporal epistemic logic (MTEL) is the preferential logic with the subjective
TEL formulae as its language, TCIS as its class of models, the satisfaction relation
(M j= ') of Definition 9 and the ordering of item 1. We will denote preferential
entailment (as defined in Definition 1) of MTEL by j=MTEL.

The idea behind using MTEL for specifying reasoning processes is that a subjective
TEL formula ' describes the reasoning of an agent over time (it can, for example, describe
the use of nonmonotonic inference rules, see Proposition 11). The minimal models of '
represent the process of the agent reasoning in time. We can then use minimal consequence
to infer properties of this reasoning process.
It is easy to see that MTEL is a generalization of Ground S5: for subjective S5 formulae
'; we have that ' j=MTEL if and only if ' j=GS5 . As an example of the use of the
notion of minimal temporal epistemic consequence, it has been shown by Engelfriet and
Treur (1993) that it can capture default logic (Reiter, 1980b).
6

fiMonotonicity and Persistence in Preferential Logics

Proposition 11 (Default logic in MTEL) Let a finite, propositional default theory  =

hW; D i

be given and let

^

^

= f2(Kff ^ G(:K :fi ) ! G(K )) j (ff; fi )= 2 Dg ^ fKff j ff 2 W g:
Then ' is a sceptical consequence of  in default logic if and only if j=MTEL F (K').
The conjuncts of the form 2(Kff ^ G(:K :fi ) ! G(K )) ensure the application of the
default rules. In words: if the agent knows the prerequisite (ff), and the justification (fi )
remains consistent with what the agent knows throughout the future, then the agent must
conclude the consequent ( ) in the next moment in time (and it will know  henceforth).

2.3 Circumscription

One of the earliest approaches to nonmonotonic reasoning is circumscription (McCarthy,
1977, 1980; Davis, 1980; Lifschitz, 1994; Etherington, 1988), a preferential logic based on
first-order predicate logic. The main idea behind circumscription is a kind of completeness
of information given to us: \the premises as stated give us `the whole truth' about the
matter" (van Benthem, 1989). This leads to at least two kinds of minimality: predicateminimality and domain-minimality. The intuition behind predicate-minimality is that for
some relevant property (predicate), all objects that have this property, are explicitly said
to have this property in the premise. This allows us to formulate defaults stating that all
normal objects have some property. Minimizing abnormality will allow us to conclude an
object has this property, unless we can deduce from the premise that this object is abnormal.
The intuition behind domain-minimality, is that the domain (of discourse) contains no other
objects than those that can be deduced to exist from the premise. (This intuition is strongly
tied to the domain-closure assumption of Reiter, 1980a). These two kinds of minimality are
formalized by two variants of Circumscription. Both of them will be treated below.
The classical logic underlying circumscription is first-order predicate logic. We assume
a standard first-order language L with a finite number of predicate symbols, including
equality. We will also assume that the language contains no function or constant symbols.
This is not a severe limitation, since we can eliminate function and constant symbols by
introducing new predicate symbols (Davis, 1980). We will first give the definition of the
orderings and then define predicate and domain circumscriptive consequence.

Definition 12

1. Let P be a predicate symbol in the language L. For a structure M for the language,
P M denotes the interpretation of P in M (so P M is a subset of dom(M )n , where
dom(M ) is the domain of M , and n is the arity of P ). For two structures M; N ,
we say M is P -preferred to N , denoted M P N , if they have the same domain,
the same interpretation of predicate symbols other than P , and P M  P N . Predicate
circumscription of P is the preferential logic which uses first-order predicate logic for
the language, models and satisfaction relation, augmented with the ordering P . We
will denote preferential entailment (as defined in Definition 1) in this logic by j=PC
P .
2. For two structures M; N for the language L, we say N is a substructure of M , denoted
N d M , if the domain of N is a subset of the domain of M , and the interpretation
7

fiEngelfriet

of each predicate symbol in N is the restriction of the corresponding interpretation in
M to dom(N ). Domain circumscription is the preferential logic which uses first-order
predicate logic for the language, models and satisfaction relation, augmented with the
ordering d . We will denote preferential entailment in this logic by j=DC .
3. If we restrict the model class to finite structures, the resulting preferential logics are
called finite predicate circumscription and finite domain circumscription.

We refer the reader to the references given above for standard results and motivation of
circumscription.

3. Respecting Monotonicity

In this section we will study formulae which respect monotonicity. We will first give a
formal definition.

Definition 13 (Respecting monotonicity) Given a preferential logic, we say a formula
' respects monotonicity, if

8ff; fi

: ff j= fi ) ff ^ ' j= fi:

Next, we will make some basic assumptions about the (underlying logic of the) preferential logic.

Assumption 1 From now on we will assume that any preferential logic satisfies the following:


the language has conjunction (^) and m j= ' ^

, m j= '



the language has implication (!) and m j= ' !



the language has negation (:) and m j= :' , m 6j= '.

and m j= .

, m 6j= '

or m j= .

We can then immediately identify a class of formulae that respect monotonicity:

Proposition 14 Downward persistent formulae respect monotonicity.
Proof: Suppose ' is downward persistent. Let ff; fi be formulae and suppose ff j= fi . Let

m be a minimal model of ff ^ '. Then it is also a minimal model of ff. For suppose it is not,
then there exists n  m, n 6= m and n j= ff. Since m j= ' and ' is downward persistent, we
have n j= '. But then n j= ff ^ ' which contradicts the assumption that m was a minimal
model of ff ^ '. Since m is a minimal model of ff and ff j= fi , we have m j= fi . We have
proved that ff ^ ' j= fi . Thus, ' respects monotonicity.
2
Of course, valid and unsatisfiable sentences are downward persistent. But the question is whether non-trivial downward persistent formulae exist. For the preferential logics
introduced in Section 2, the answer is armative.
8

fiMonotonicity and Persistence in Preferential Logics

Definition 15 (DIAM) Define the class of S5 formulae DIAM by:
DIAM ::= M (') j DIAM ^ DIAM j DIAM _ DIAM j M (DIAM)
where ' is propositional.

Formulae from DIAM essentially only contain the M operator (the `diamond' of S5, and
not the `box' operator K ). Formulae in this class are the only subjective formulae (up to
equivalence) which are downward persistent in Ground S5 (this was proved by Engelfriet,
1996a).

Theorem 16 A subjective S5 formula ' is downward persistent in Ground S5 if and only
if it is S5-equivalent to a formula in DIAM.

So in Ground S5 there is a non-empty class of downward persistent formulae, that
respect monotonicity by Proposition 14. Essentially, these formulae only say something
about the ignorance of the agent. One might think that formulae from DIAM are completely
uninteresting, and never yield any new insights in Ground S5. The converse of monotonicity
for these formulae, ff ^ ' j=GS5 fi ) ff j=GS5 fi , however, does not hold, even when ' is
consistent with ff. We do not have that Kp _ Kq j=GS5 Kq, whereas we do have that
(Kp _ Kq) ^ M (:p) j=GS5 Kq with M (:p) 2 DIAM. So knowledge of ignorance can be
useful.
An analogous result holds for minimal temporal epistemic logic.

Definition 17 (TD)
1. Define
TD ::= DIAM j TD ^ TD j TD _ TD j F (TD) j G(TD) j P (TD) j H (TD)
2. For two subjective TEL formulae '; :

'

,def

for all TELC models M : M j= ' , M j= :

TD stands for `temporal diamond' formulae. The following was also proved by Engelfriet
(1996a).

Theorem 18 In MTEL, a formula ' is downward persistent if and only if it is equivalent
(in the sense of ) to a formula in TD.

As in the case of Ground S5, these formulae express (temporal) ignorance of the agent.

Definition 19 (Positive and universal formulae) A first-order predicate formula is negative in a predicate P , if all occurrences of the predicate P are in the scope of an odd number
of negations. A formula is universal if it is of the form 8x1 : : : xn where is quantifier
free.
9

fiEngelfriet

The following result links these formulae to downward persistence in circumscription.
The first is a variant of Lyndon's theorem and is folklore (we leave the details to the
reader); the second result is known as the Los-Tarski theorem (Chang & Keisler, 1990,
Theorem 3.2.2).

Theorem 20
1. A first-order predicate formula ' is downward persistent in predicate circumscription
(of P ) if and only if it is equivalent to a formula that is negative in P .
2. A first-order predicate formula ' is downward persistent in domain circumscription if
and only if it is equivalent to a universal formula.

So downward persistent formulae in predicate circumscription essentially only say something about elements not having property P (besides the other properties they mention),
and downward persistent formulae in domain circumscription essentially only mention universal properties (and do not say anything about the existence of objects).
For our examples, we have shown that non-trivial classes of formulae that respect monotonicity exist. The question is whether there are more such formulae, besides those that are
downward persistent. We will give a criterion that ensures that there are no more formulae
that respect monotonicity.

Definition 21 (Expressibility of preference) A preferential logic satisfies expressibility of preference if the following holds:

8m 2 Mod : 9'm 2 L : 8n 2 Mod : (n j= 'm , m  n):

The formula 'm expresses: \I am less preferred than m," and describes exactly those
models which are larger in the preferential ordering. The criterion of expressibility of
preference poses a requirement on the expressiveness of the language, given its semantics.
We will prove that in preferential logics that satisfy the condition in this definition, the
downward persistent formulae are the only ones that respect monotonicity. The above
condition can be generalized by taking into account equivalent models; we have not done
this immediately as it makes things rather cumbersome. If whenever n  m and m  k
(where m  k means that m and k satisfy the same formulae), there exists a model l such
that l  n and l  k, then we can generalize the condition to: 8m 2 Mod : 9'm 2 L : 8n 2
Mod : (n j= 'm , 9k 2 Mod : m  k & k  n).

Theorem 22 (Only if : : : ) For a preferential logic that satisfies expressibility of preference we have: if a formula respect monotonicity, then it is downward persistent.

Proof: Suppose a formula ' is not downward persistent, then there exist models m and

n such that m j= ', n 6j= ' and n  m. Define ff = 'n ^ (' ! 'm ) and fi = :'. First
we claim that ff j= fi . Since n  n, we have n j= 'n , and as n 6j= ' we get n j= ff.
Furthermore, for any model k, if k j= ff then in particular k j= 'n so n  k. Therefore,
n is the only minimal model of ff, and since n 6j= ', we have n j= fi . On the other hand,
ff ^ ' 6j= fi : n  m so m j= 'n and m  m so m j= 'm from which we conclude that m j= ff
10

fiMonotonicity and Persistence in Preferential Logics

so m j= ff ^ '. Furthermore, for any model k, if k j= ff ^ ', then k j= ' and k j= ' ! 'm
so k j= 'm . From this it follows that m  k, but this means that m is a (actually, the
only) minimal model of ff ^ ' and m j= ' so m 6j= fi . We conclude that ' does not respect
monotonicity, since we have found formulae ff and fi such that ff j= fi but ff ^ ' 6j= fi . 2
It may seem that the condition of expressibility of preference is too restrictive. However,
we will see that it is useful for the examples.

Proposition 23 For Ground S5, MTEL and finite predicate and domain circumscription,
only downward persistent formulae respect monotonicity.

Proof: Remark that all of these logics satisfy Assumption 1. First consider Ground S5.
Let us first take the language to be finite (that is, P is finite). Take any
S5 model M .
V
m
m
For each
propositional valuation m, define the formula ff by ff = fp 2 P j m j=
pg ^ Vf:Vp j p 2 P; m 6j= pg. This is a well-defined formula since P is finite. Now construct
'M = fK (:ffm ) j m 2= M g, which is again a well-defined formula since Mod(P ) is
finite. It can easily be seen that any S5 model N satisfies 'M if and only if M  N . So
expressibility of preference is satisfied, whence Theorem 22 ensures that only downward
persistent formulae respect monotonicity for this finite language. Now let P be arbitrary,
and suppose ' in this language respects monotonicity. Then it is easy to see that if we
restrict the language to atoms occurring in ', it still respects monotonicity, so it is downward
persistent in the restricted language. It follows easily that ' is also downward persistent in
the full language.
For MTEL, the same considerations make it sucient to give a formula 'M for a finite
language only, so let us take P finite. Then every S5 model M(i) is a finite set of propositional valuations. Since the sequence fM(i)g is decreasing with respect to set-inclusion
(as M is conservative), there will be an index k such that M(j ) = M(k) for all j > k.
To improve readability of the formula 'M we define the formulae ati to be P i > ^ H i+1 ?
(where P i stands for a sequence of P operators of length i). It is easy to see that for any
model N we have (N ; j ) j= ati if and only if j = i. Now define:
'M = Vf2(ati ! 'M(i) ) j 0  i  kg, where 'M(i) is the formula as defined in the case of
Ground S5 for the S5 model M(i) . It is easy to show that N j= 'M if and only if M  N .
For finite circumscription, we need the more general definition of expressibility of preference hinted at before (in first-order logic, there may be equivalent models: different models
that satisfy the same first-order formulae). Here we need not restrict the language. In
predicate circumscription, the required formula 'M for a finite structure M expresses: (i)
the exact number of elements of the domain of M , (ii) for which of these elements P holds,
and (iii) for all other predicates Q it expresses for which elements Q holds, and for which its
negation holds. In domain circumscription, the required formula 'M for a finite structure
M expresses the fact that there are (at least) as many elements as in M , and for each
predicate Q, it expresses for which of these elements Q holds, and for which elements its
negation holds.
2
It is not possible to find the required formula 'M in (non-finite) circumscription in
general: for infinite structures we are not in general able to express the number of elements,
11

fiEngelfriet

and we can not describe the entire extensions of predicates in general. Indeed, the above
result does not hold for domain circumscription. It is still an open question whether it holds
for predicate circumscription.

Proposition 24 For domain circumscription, there exists a first-order predicate formula
which respects monotonicity but is not downward persistent.

Proof: Consider the first-order language L = f<; =g, and let ' be a sentence stating that

< is a dense linear ordering without begin- or endpoint. This is a complete theory (Rabin,
1977, Theorem 4), which means that for any ff 2 L, either ' j= ff or ' j= :ff. Now suppose
ff j=DC fi . If ' j= :ff then ff ^ ' is inconsistent, so ff ^ ' j=DC fi trivially. Otherwise we
have that ' j= ff so ff ^ ' is equivalent to '. But it is easy to see that ' does not have a
minimal model, so again we have ff ^ ' j=DC fi . However, ' is not downward persistent: it
holds in the real numbers, but not in the substructure of the natural numbers.
2
Until now we have considered formulae that can be added to any premise, but we can
also ask the question whether a formula respects monotonicity for a given, fixed premise.

Proposition 25 Given a preferential logic such that Mod is finite and for all m 2 Mod

there exists ffm 2 L such that n j= ffm if and only if n = m, let ff be a fixed formula in L.
Then we have for all ' 2 L:
8fi (ff j=

fi ) ff ^ ' j= fi ) , 8m 2 Mod(m j= ff ^ ' ) m j= ff):
Proof: The right to left direction is trivial (and does not depend on the assumption). For
the other direction, suppose that 8fi (ff j= Wfi ) ff ^ ' j= fi ). Let m 2 Mod be arbitrary
and suppose m j= ff ^ '. Now define fi = fffn j n j= ffg; this is a well-defined formula
since Mod was assumed finite. It is easy to see that ff j= fi : suppose n j= ff, then ffn
is one of the disjuncts of fi , and by definition of ffn , we have n j= ffn , so n j= fi . But the
assumption now gives that ff ^ ' j= fi . As m j= ff ^ ', we have m j= fi , so there is an
n 2 Mod with n j= ff and m j= ffn. But by definition of ffn this means that m = n so
m j= ff.
2
Proposition 25 states that a formula ' respects monotonicity for a fixed premise ff if
and only if the minimal models of ff ^ ' are minimal models of ff. Of course the criterion
on the right-hand side is hard to check; we can give another criterion, but for that, we first
need the following definition (Kraus et al., 1990):

Definition 26 (Smoothness) A preferential logic is called smooth, if the following holds:
8ff 2 L : 8m 2 Mod : (m j= ff ) 9n 2 Mod : n  m & n j= ff):
This condition, which is also called stopperedness or well-foundedness, and is akin to
the limit assumption (Lewis, 1973), forbids chains of ever-decreasing models satisfying a
formula. It is one of the basic properties in the framework of Kraus et al. (1990).
Proposition 27 Given a smooth preferential logic, we have: 8m 2 Mod(m j= ff ^ ' )
m j= ff) if and only if 8m 2 Mod(m j= ff ^ ' ) 9n 2 Mod(n  m; n j= ff and n j= ')).
12

fiMonotonicity and Persistence in Preferential Logics

The proof of this proposition is straightforward, and again it may not help much. As
far as the examples are concerned, the conclusion of Proposition 25 holds for both Ground
S5 and MTEL (the properties depend only on ff and ' so we may restrict the signature and
then use the proposition). Proposition 27 holds for Ground S5 (which is smooth). From
these propositions we can find some sucient conditions. If ' is downward persistent in
the models of ff, then Proposition 25 ensures that ' respects monotonicity with respect to
ff. If ff j= ' then Proposition 27 ensures that ' respects monotonicity with respect to ff
(but this also follows immediately with the rule of Cautious Monotonicity, which is satisfied
in smooth preferential logics, Kraus et al., 1990). It seems hard to find a simple criterion
necessary and sucient for respecting monotonicity for a given premise. We leave this for
further research.

4. Conservativity

In the previous section we have considered formulae that can always be added to a premise
without invalidating any of the conclusions. In this section we will focus on the conclusions,
and study formulae that, when they are concluded, can always be kept, no matter which
new information is added to the premise. We will call these formulae conservative.

Definition 28 (Conservative) Given a preferential logic, we say a formula fi is conservative, if

8ff; ' : ff j=

fi ) ff ^ ' j= fi:

We have the following result connecting upward persistent and conservative formulae,
in analogy with Proposition 14.

Proposition 29 Given a preferential logic that is smooth, if a formula is upward persistent,
it is conservative.

Proof: Let fi be upward persistent in a smooth preferential logic. Now suppose ff j= fi .
Take any model m such that m j= ff ^ ', then m j= ff so by smoothness, there is a model
n with n  m and n j= ff. Then, as ff j= fi , we have n j= fi . Since n  m and fi is
upward persistent, we have m j= fi . This shows that ff ^ ' j= fi , so fi is conservative. 2
Again, we can ask if the upward persistent formulae are the only conservative formulae,
and this is true under the same conditions as in the case of respecting monotonicity.
Proposition 30 (Only if : : : ) For a preferential logic that satisfies expressibility of preference we have: if a formula is conservative, then it is upward persistent.
Proof: Suppose fi is not upward persistent, then there are n; m 2 Mod such that n  m,
and n j= fi but m 6j= fi . Now take ff = 'n and ' = 'm . Then n is the only minimal model
of ff and n j= fi so ff j= fi , but m is a (actually, the only one) minimal model of ff ^ ', and
m 6j= fi , so ff ^ ' 6j= fi . Thus, fi is not conservative.
2
Let us first identify the upward persistent formulae for our examples. This is relatively
straightforward, since we have the following elementary result.
13

fiEngelfriet

Proposition 31 For any preferential logic, ' is upward persistent if and only if :' is
downward persistent.

This gives us the following.

Proposition 32
1. Define BOX ::= K (') j BOX ^ BOX j BOX _ BOX j K (BOX) with ' propositional.
Then a subjective S5 formula ' is upward persistent in Ground S5 if and only if it is
S5-equivalent to a formula in BOX.
2. Define TB ::= BOX j TB ^ TB j TB _ TB j F (TB) j G(TB) j P (TB) j H (TB). Then a
subjective TEL formula ' is upward persistent in MTEL if and only if it is equivalent
(in the sense of ) to a formula in TB.
3. A first-order formula is upward persistent in predicate circumscription (of P ) if and
only if it is equivalent to a formula that is positive in P (meaning that all occurrences
of the predicate P are in the scope of an even number of negations). A first-order
formula is upward persistent in domain circumscription if and only if it is equivalent
to an existential formula (a formula of the form 9x1 : : : xn where is quantifier
free).

Proof: Straightforward.

2

In the above definition, formulae from BOX essentially only contain the K operator (the
`box' of S5); TB stands for `temporal box' formulae. Now let us see what Propositions 29
and 30 say about the examples. Ground S5 satisfies expressibility of preference (for a finite
language) and is smooth, so the conservative formulae are exactly the upward persistent
formulae, which express only knowledge (and not ignorance). This can be lifted again
to an infinite language. The fact that in Ground S5, formulae that express propositional
knowledge, are conservative, was already noted by Donini et al. (1997). MTEL also satisfies
expressibility of preference (for a finite language), so any formula that is conservative, must
be upward persistent, and must be equivalent to a formula in TB, expressing knowledge
over time (not ignorance). This can be lifted to an infinite language. Unfortunately, MTEL
is not smooth: the formula F (Kp) is satisfiable, but has no minimal model. In MTEL,
we have that F (Kp) j=MTEL F (Kq), but F (Kp) ^ Kp 6j=MTEL F (Kq) (F (Kp) ^ Kp has a
minimal model, in which only p is known, from the first point in time onwards). This means
that the formula F (Kq) is not conservative, although it is upward persistent. It is easy to
see that in any preferential logic, valid formulae are always conservative, but in MTEL,
these are (almost) the only ones.

Definition 33 We call a TEL model M totally ignorant, if for all propositional formulae

' we have: if M j= F (K') then ' is a propositional tautology. Define the totally ignorant
model Mti by Mti (i) = Mod(P ) for all i.
In a totally ignorant model, no knowledge is ever gained. The totally ignorant model is
certainly a totally ignorant model, and if P is finite, it is the only one.
14

fiMonotonicity and Persistence in Preferential Logics

Proposition 34 For MTEL, in case P is infinite, we have that a formula is conservative
if and only if it is true in all models. When P is finite, a formula is conservative if and
only if it is true in all models except possibly the totally ignorant model.

Proof: We will prove that fi is conservative if and only if it is true in all models that are not

totally ignorant (both when P is finite and when it is infinite). First, suppose M is a model
that is not totally ignorant, in which fi is not true. So M j= F (K ) for some propositional
formula  that is not a propositional tautology. If P is finite, we can consider the formula
'M (see the proof of Proposition 23 for the definition of 'M ). If P is infinite, one can
show that M can be chosen in such a way that it is a `inherently finite' model, allowing the
construction of a formula 'M with the same properties as for the case when P is finite (using
essentially the same construction). The details of this argument are left to the reader. The
formula F (K ) does not have a minimal model ( must be known sometimes in the future,
but this moment can always be postponed, yielding a smaller model), so F (K ) j=MTEL fi .
On the other hand, it can easily be shown that the only minimal model of F (K ) ^ 'M is
M , which gives us F (K ) ^ 'M 6j=MTEL fi . This means that fi is not conservative.
Now suppose that fi is true in all models that are not totally ignorant, and suppose
ff j=MTEL fi . Let M be a minimal model of ff ^ '. If M is not totally ignorant, then
M j= fi . If it is totally ignorant, then also Mti j= ff ^ ' (it can be shown by induction that
all totally ignorant models satisfy the same formulae). But then Mti j= ff. Since no model
is preferred over Mti , this means that Mti j= ff so Mti j= fi , whence M j= fi . It follows
that ff ^ ' j=MTEL fi , so fi is conservative.
Let us look at the case when P is infinite. Suppose M 6j= fi , with M totally ignorant.
Now take a propositional atom p not occurring in fi . It can easily be shown that we can
find a model of Kp in which fi is not satisfied. This model is of course not totally ignorant.
This shows that if fi is true in all models that are not totally ignorant, then it is true in all
models. In case P is finite, Mti is the only totally ignorant model.
2
So in MTEL with an infinite P , valid formulae are the only conservative formulae.
These formulae are of course upward persistent (in a trivial way), and they are equivalent
to a formula in TB, for instance K (>). When the signature is finite, there are some extra
formulae that are conservative, for example if P = fp; qg, then the formula F (K (p _ q) _
K (:p _ q) _ K (p _ :q) _ K (:p _ :q)) is also conservative (it is true in all models except
the totally ignorant one). Of course, this formula is upward persistent, and it is in TB.
Finite predicate and domain circumscription satisfy both expressibility of preference
and smoothness, so the conservative formulae coincide with the upward persistent formulae
which have the syntactic characterization of Proposition 32.
Full circumscription satisfies neither of the conditions.

Proposition 35 In predicate and domain circumscription there are upward persistent formulae that are not conservative.

Proof: First consider predicate circumscription. Let the language consist of three predicates besides equality, namely P , Succ and < (and P is circumscribed). Define the formulae
15

fiEngelfriet

ff and ' as follows:
ff = 8x9!y(Succ(x; y))^
' = 8xy(Px ^ Succ(y; x) ! Py)
8x9!y (Succ(y; x))^
8xy (Succ(x; y ) ! x < y )^
8xyz (x < y ^ y < z ! x < z )^
8x(:(x < x))^
8xy (x < y _ y < x _ x = y )^
9xPx
8xy (Px ^ Succ(x; y ) ! Py )
The intuitive meaning of ff is that there are Succ-chains of elements, extending indefinitely
in both directions. If P occurs somewhere on such a chain, it must be true in all successors
as well. A model of ff can be made smaller (more preferred) by making P false in a point
and all of its predecessors (leaving it true in all successors). We will now make this argument
formal. The first claim is that ff has no P - minimal models. Let M be a model of ff. Then
there must be an x 2 dom(M ) with x 2 P M . Define A = fxg [ fy 2 P M j (y; x) 2<M g.
Let N be the structure with the same domain as M , the same extension of Succ and <, and
P N = P M n A. It is straightforward to verify that N is a model of ff, and that N P M
and N 6= M .
On the other hand, ff ^ ' has minimal models. Let M be the structure with dom(M ) = Z
(the integers), (a; b) 2 SuccM , b = a + 1, (a; b) 2<M , a < b in the natural ordering
on the integers, and P M = Z. It can easily be checked that M j= ff ^ '. Now suppose
N P M , N 6= M and N j= ff ^ '. This means that P N  Z (strict inclusion), and P N 6= ;
(as N j= 9xPx). But then there must be x; y 2 Z with y = x + 1, and either x 2 P N and
y 2= P N , or x 2= P N and y 2 P N , contradicting either N j= 8xy(Px ^ Succ(x; y) ! Py)
(N j= ff) or N j= '. Therefore M is a minimal model of ff ^ '.
Now define fi = 9x(x 6= x), which is trivially upward persistent. Since ff has no minimal
PC
models, we have ff j=PC
P fi , but M 6j= fi , so ff ^ ' 6j=P fi . This shows that fi is not
conservative.
For domain circumscription, the example is quite similar. Again take fi = 9x(x 6= x).
Now define the formulae ff and ' as follows:
ff = 8x9!y(Succ(x; y))^
' = 8y9x(Succ(x; y))
8xy (Succ(x; y ) ! x < y )^
8xyz (x < y ^ y < z ! x < z )^
8x(:(x < x))^
8xy (x < y _ y < x _ x = y )^
8xyz (Succ(x; z ) ^ Succ(y; z ) ! x = y )
One can now check that ff has no d -minimal models, but ff ^ ' does, so the same fi is
upward persistent but not conservative in domain circumscription. The details are left to
the reader.
2
Until now, we have looked at formulae which, once concluded, are never lost, regardless
of what new information comes in, but also regardless of what the initial premise was.
16

fiMonotonicity and Persistence in Preferential Logics

However, we can also consider the situation with the premise fixed (analogously to the last
part of the previous section): given a premise, which conclusions may be kept regardless of
new information?

Proposition 36 For a preferential logic that satisfies expressibility of preference, if
ff j= fi , then
(8' : ff ^ ' j= fi ) , ff j= fi:
Proof: Suppose ff j= fi .
\(" If ff j= fi then for any ' we have ff ^ ' j= fi so ff ^ ' j= fi .

\)" Suppose ff 6j= fi , then there exists m 2 Mod such that m j= ff but m 6j= fi . Then
m j= ff ^ 'm (!), so ff ^ 'm 6j= fi .
2
Note that the condition ff j= fi was not used in the proof; if ff 6j= fi the equivalence is
still true, as both sides are false. The proposition shows that the monotonic consequences
of a premise are the only ones conservative with respect to this fixed premise.

Corollary 37 Let fi be a conservative formula for a preferential logic that satisfies expressibility of preference, then ff j= fi , ff j= fi .
Proof: If ff j= fi then in any preferential logic it follows that ff j= fi . On the other hand, if
ff j= fi , then for any ' we have ff ^ ' j= fi , since fi is conservative. With Proposition 36
2

it follows that ff j= fi .

In the last two sections, we have derived a number of results on formulae that respect
monotonicity and conservative formulae and the links with persistent formulae. In the next
section we will discuss the impact of these results in practice.

5. Practical Implications

The results in this paper may improve the eciency of theorem provers for preferential
logics, depending on a number of factors. In the first place, it is important how the theorem
prover is used.
Consider the situation where we have a stand-alone theorem prover which gets different
(unrelated) queries. Furthermore, suppose the theorem prover is asked to prove ff1 ^ : : : ^
ffn j= fi . Then there are at least two possibilities for using the results in the paper.
First of all, suppose the preferential logic satisfies expressibility of preference. Then if fi
is upward persistent, we do not have to prove ff1 ^ : : : ^ ffn j= fi , as it is equivalent to
prove ff1 ^ : : : ^ ffn j= fi (Corollary 37). In most preferential logics, preferential entailment
is harder to compute than entailment in the underlying logic.
In the second place, sometimes local reasoning is possible (which is not possible in general
for non-monotonic logics): the theorem prover may derive the conclusion from part of the
premise. So it may be the case that there is a 1  k < n such that ff1 ^ : : : ^ ffk j= fi which
is easier to verify than the original query. Then if ffk+1 ; : : : ; ffn are downward persistent,
Proposition 14 implies that ff1 ^: : :^ffn j= fi . If fi is upward persistent (and the preferential
logic is smooth), Proposition 29 sanctions ff1 ^ : : : ^ ffn j= fi . For these results to be usable
17

fiEngelfriet

in a theorem prover, we need heuristic knowledge to decide if there is a promising split of
the premise into two parts A and B . For such a split, we can then try to prove A j= fi
and downward persistence of B or upward persistence of fi . In case ff1 ^ : : : ^ ffk j= fi can
not be proved, we may have to directly prove ff1 ^ : : : ^ ffn j= fi after all.
These two methods will of course only improve eciency if the determination of persistence is easier than the original query (we will treat this question below).
The second kind of situation is when we have a theorem prover which is used by an
agent which has a lot of knowledge about the world, and from time to time performs
observations to increase its knowledge. Then, although sometimes the agent will need to
perform revisions, we are often in the situation that (many) conclusions from a premise
(ff) have been proved, and the premise is augmented by a new formula ('). If this new
formula is downward persistent, then the agent can retain all the old conclusions (and may
only need to derive some new conclusions). If it is not, it can at least retain all the upward
persistent conclusions (if the preferential logic is smooth). We may also try to determine
if ' is downward persistent given ff, or if fi is conservative given ff. Again, these methods
only improve eciency if it is easier to determine if ' respects monotonicity (possibly given
ff) than recomputing all old conclusions, or if it is easier to determine that fi is conservative
(possibly given ff) than checking ff ^ ' j= fi .
The possible eciency improvement in both cases heavily depends on the cost of determining persistence relative to the cost of determining preferential consequence. Unfortunately, it is very hard to say anything about this issue in general. It depends on the
preferential logic at hand, on the representation of the logic (syntactically, as a proof calculus, or semantically, as models with a preference relation), and on other implementation
issues. For instance, it can be important how much information is retained from previous
queries: whether proofs or minimal models are stored. Let us consider the examples again.
Preferential entailment in both Ground S5 and MTEL is QP3 -complete (Engelfriet,
1996a), whereas full circumscription is undecidable (restricted versions of circumscription
exist which are decidable, but still highly complex). Unfortunately, determining downward
or upward persistence is not easier for these logics. We have seen that the classes of persistent formulae have syntactic representations of the form: ' is upward/downward persistent
if and only if it is equivalent to a formula in C , where C is a (syntactic) class of formulae.
Now, of course, determining equivalence to a formula in C is as complex as determining
persistence, but there may be subclasses of a class of persistent formulae, with a lower
complexity. For instance, determining membership of C is much easier, namely polynomial.
The members of C are persistent. So what we propose is to check membership of C , instead
of equivalence to a member of C . In that case, we will miss some persistent formulae (and
have to prove the original query), but this disadvantage is outweighed by the complexity
advantage of checking membership. The checking of membership can be improved upon by
adding some (easy) checks for equivalence to a formula in C . For instance, in Ground S5,
if we consider, for a formula ', for each propositional sub-formula, the nearest K operator
in which scope it lies, then if all of these K operators are in the scope of an odd number of
negations, we can conclude that ' is downward persistent. The formula :K (q _ Kp), for
example, satisfies this condition, and although it is not a member of DIAM, it is equivalent
to :Kq ^ :Kp 2 DIAM. This check is obviously polynomial.
18

fiMonotonicity and Persistence in Preferential Logics

Given a preferential logic, the designer of a theorem prover could proceed as follows.
First, syntactic classes of formulae that are downward and upward persistent have to be
identified. For Ground S5, MTEL and predicate and domain circumscription, these can be
found in Definitions 15, 17, 19 and Proposition 32. For other preferential logics, if such
classes are trivial (they may, for instance, only include tautologies and contradictions),
then the usefulness of the results is limited. Otherwise, the theorem prover could work
as follows. Given a query of the form ff ^ ' j= fi , first it is checked if ' belongs to the
syntactic class of downward persistent formulae or if fi belongs to the syntactic class of
upward persistent formulae (this latter test should only be performed if the preferential
logic is smooth). If fi is conservative and the logic satisfies expressibility of preference, it
tries to prove ff ^ ' j= fi (this usually has a lower complexity than the original query; for
Ground S5 and MTEL, monotonic consequence is NP-complete, Engelfriet, 1996a). The
answer of this query is the answer to the original query (see Corollary 37). Otherwise, if
' belongs to the syntactic class of downward persistent formulae or if fi belongs to the
syntactic class of upward persistent formulae (but the logic does not satisfy expressibility
of preference), then the theorem prover tries to prove ff j= fi . If this succeeds, it outputs
yes. Otherwise, it will try to answer the original query directly.
As stated before, the practical savings in part depend on representation and implementation aspects. It also depends on the application domain and use of the theorem prover:
if formulae in these syntactic classes occur often, the eciency improvement is higher than
if they are infrequent.

6. Conclusions and Further Research
We have looked at restrictions of monotonicity in preferential logics. While monotonicity
does not hold in general, we can identify (in general non-trivial) classes of formulae for
which restricted versions of monotonicity holds. This may make (nonmonotonic) deduction
in preferential logics easier, since we may sometimes keep conclusions, or identify which
conclusions may be kept, when adding new information to a premise. The results in this
paper may lead to more ecient implementations of preferential logics. Experimenting with
theorem provers which use these results is necessary in order to determine the eciency
improvement in practice.
It would be nice to find a better characterization of formulae that can be added to a
given, fixed premise without destroying conclusions.
Syntactic characterizations of persistent formulae were given for a number of example
preferential logics, but we would like to have a result for broader classes of preferential
logics, such as the class of ground nonmonotonic modal logics (Donini et al., 1997).

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Riccardo Rosati for stimulating discussions and worthwhile suggestions. Also, I would like to thank Pascal van Eck, Jan Treur, Rineke Verbrugge, Elles
de Vries and Wieke de Vries for reading and commenting on earlier versions of this doc19

fiEngelfriet

ument. Furthermore, I would like to thank Heinrich Herre for suggesting the example in
Proposition 24. The anonymous referees helped to improve the paper.

References

Chang, C. C., & Keisler, H. J. (1990). Model Theory (3rd edition). Amsterdam: NorthHolland.
Chen, J. (1997). The generalized logic of only knowing (GOL) that covers the notion of
epistemic specifications. Journal of Logic and Computation, 7 (2), 159{174.
Davis, M. (1980). The mathematics of non-monotonic reasoning. Artificial Intelligence, 13,
73{80.
Donini, F. M., Nardi, D., & Rosati, R. (1997). Ground nonmonotonic modal logics. Journal
of Logic and Computation, 7 (4), 523{548.
Engelfriet, J. (1996a). Minimal temporal epistemic logic. Notre Dame Journal of Formal
Logic, 37 (2), 233{259.
Engelfriet, J. (1996b). Only persistence makes nonmonotonicity monotonous (extended abstract). In Alferes, J. J., Pereira, L. M., & Orlowska, E. (Eds.), Logics in Artificial
Intelligence, Proceedings JELIA'96, Vol. 1126 of Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 164{175. Springer-Verlag.
Engelfriet, J., & Treur, J. (1993). A temporal model theory for default logic. In Clarke,
M., Kruse, R., & Moral, S. (Eds.), Proceedings 2nd European Conference on Symbolic
and Quantitative Approaches to Reasoning and Uncertainty, ECSQARU'93, Vol. 747
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 91{96. Springer-Verlag. Extended and
revised version to appear as \An interpretation of default logic in minimal temporal
epistemic logic" in the Journal of Logic, Language and Information.
Engelfriet, J., & Treur, J. (1994). Temporal theories of reasoning. In MacNish, C., Pearce,
D., & Pereira, L. M. (Eds.), Logics in Artificial Intelligence, Proceedings JELIA'94,
Vol. 838 of Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 279{299. Springer-Verlag. Also
in Journal of Applied Non-Classical Logics, 5(2):239{261, 1995.
Engelfriet, J., & Treur, J. (1996). Specification of nonmonotonic reasoning. In Gabbay,
D. M., & Ohlbach, H. J. (Eds.), Practical Reasoning, Proceedings FAPR'96, Vol. 1085
of Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 111{125. Springer-Verlag.
Etherington, D. W. (1988). Reasoning with Incomplete Information. Los Altos, CA: Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers.
Halpern, J. Y. (1997). A theory of knowledge and ignorance for many agents. Journal of
Logic and Computation, 7 (1), 79{108.
Halpern, J. Y., & Moses, Y. (1985). Towards a theory of knowledge and ignorance: preliminary report. In Apt, K. R. (Ed.), Logics and Models of Concurrent Systems, Vol.
F13 of NATO ASI Series, pp. 459{476. Springer-Verlag.
20

fiMonotonicity and Persistence in Preferential Logics

Kraus, S., Lehmann, D., & Magidor, M. (1990). Nonmonotonic reasoning, preferential
models and cumulative logics. Artificial Intelligence, 44, 167{207.
Levesque, H. J. (1990). All I know: A study in autoepistemic logic. Artificial Intelligence,
42, 263{309.
Lewis, D. K. (1973). Counterfactuals. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lifschitz, V. (1994). Circumscription. In Gabbay, D. M., Hogger, C. J., & Robinson, J. A.
(Eds.), Handbook of Logic in Artificial Intelligence and Logic Programming, Vol. 3,
pp. 297{352. Oxford University Press.
McCarthy, J. (1977). Epistemological problems of artificial intelligence. In Reddy, R. (Ed.),
Proceedings 5th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1038{
1044. Los Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
McCarthy, J. (1980). Circumscription | a form of non-monotonic reasoning. Artificial
Intelligence, 13, 27{39.
Meyer, J.-J. C., & van der Hoek, W. (1995). Epistemic Logic for Computer Science and
Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 41 of Cambridge Tracts in Theoretical Computer Science.
Cambridge University Press.
Rabin, M. O. (1977). Decidable theories. In Barwise, J. (Ed.), Handbook of Mathematical
Logic, pp. 595{629. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Reiter, R. (1980a). Equality and domain closure in first-order data bases. Journal of the
ACM, 27, 235{249.
Reiter, R. (1980b). A logic for default reasoning. Artificial Intelligence, 13, 81{132.
Schwarz, G., & Truszczynski, M. (1994). Minimal knowledge problem: A new approach.
Artificial Intelligence, 67, 113{141.
Shoham, Y. (1987). Nonmonotonic logics: Meaning and utility. In McDermott, J. (Ed.),
Proceedings 10th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 388{
392. Los Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Shoham, Y. (1988). Reasoning about Change. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
van Benthem, J. F. A. K. (1989). Semantic parallels in natural language and computation.
In Ebbinghaus, H. D., & al. (Eds.), Logic Colloquium'87, Granada, pp. 331{375.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.

21

fi
	ff
fi 
			 ! #"$ % 
'&)(+*, --(/.$0-21435

64789 :)3/;
-/<4=>7	%&:@?/;
-(

ACBEDGFIHDKJML4NL
HPORQTSUAWVYXZQ[B\OR]^D)H\F_VML`Ya

bdc#efhg^f^ikjmlonog^fhpdqrsp_lhtuevwfp

xoyPz$xo{)|o}\~uudx

fovc#tfh#ZtPe


o|o~uudx

'@w/sTwuEwZP'@Pu

+^h


m s+9w2

)Eu
YZwuZIK/2492G29w@mY9
MIKw@4ssw
2m2$92+u4
#242!s[uu Tu#!mT I$4!
w4Z2T!ZK2w
sZ24ff2G
Tw2!/umwE2[2u2
M+22! 24Y2!/ 4
22
w/w442C

2ffkffw@24Cff 9

ff s2Ysff/ums+Y2+//42wu
@2/242G9
/24@wds24!)224

M
2
/wM22u2ww
24sw244_wC2
K2

M[4mwmK22w[wZ29[2s
m!@T92)_'/o!2924ff2mhu_u24@92#2
k+22wI242T wEZo2+_22w24EI[2
ff [2!
C24/u4mw/P4
sC2Y22w2
!2w924/m9Z44m2[/ 42w\/w4
224kw2Y22
Gm244ws !k22s2
249w/244w\ I24

sw2s4

EM u	


fiff!#"ff%$&'("*)+%-,."*/&0214365798(:4;*0	<#1>=@?>ABC%ffDE%6FG((HJI*-ffKL$",M*%ff
'"*N*B",OP"*/QE'"RP#",O"ff'-ff>ST%ff$R-$LR"O)U"J)V+JN!WV-G-$XB*ff$YORS"*/Z+%)-+J-$
R6*%ff%ff'H[#\'*,O+%-U/@"*U'O$'",M*ffK#"ff#]_^_'"*6N`%ff'HY"*)V+J-,aER"b6Ic%_"ff+%N
'M%ff$%R-$d#",O"ff'-ff>P"*/G'O'"*N*Bef6gT'O-f+J%ff'Hh'"*Ng#"*-#+JNg+%*6ji-
*+%+MR6*%ffff'Hb#\4*,M+J-]bkUf'l#"ff#`ffm%ffg%P_PR"F$'R`,M%ff'O/2"*l&%6n+*R-T"*/
+J"*H%*+o$'",M*%ffY'"*`J-S'T"*NLV6%ffHM"*)+%-,pSR6*#)+J*]
^'"*6NO6ff'H(*ffh)&"f'HqG"*/o*r_sNct"*/C'"*6NMI4%J"ffL%ffM&%6LI4%J"ffU,M*$'
R"P%ff$%Ic%$f*+#",O"ff'-ff>e"*/'r'"*N*]uK*ffqN!f`!*+JH*"*6J,[e-I*S)-ff!%ffqI*-JHR-$O%ff('
+%JR`f'!"ffg'"*NKI4%J"ffXB)"*d%ffg,M*`%ff'O+J-6ff%ff'HdvxwP"*-+yBXz'-+%$,[*ffXBQ{.|cH**B}-~*~'
kUf'`RR"ffM{u"c"ff'N*Bt}-~*~'|'*JR4BqG"*R4B4{&6	B}-~*~*ccd"*Hf+%%B}-~*~4}*ff$O%ffO%ff$f#JI*r+J"*H%
"*H*`*,M,M%ff'Hbv2
fioGvx$* BuK*+J/2*%B'{-E-$'Bo}-~*~'V-E-$'Bo}-~*~*cd"*)-+yBX}-~*~'Be}-~*~*`]
6IcJ"fG"*h%ffh'"*N[6Ic%6J"ffY*r6%,[6%+JN!)-ffY#"ff#6ff'-$Y&%L"*)+J-,p"*/Citff$%ff'H
'Y"*%,[*+I4%%"ffR"dK'"*Nm/@"*OKHJI*-ffR!"*/&R`*%ff%ff'H#\4*,OV+J-B*#"*6$%ff'HKR"nR",O
/2-ff#[)%*][z"*l#\'*,O+J*BeD'"*NgI4%%"ffd*+JH*"*6J,,[-Nd/2TR",[*['M/2G-R
ffcf,l)S"*/eI4%J"ffSff-#-NYR"[R/@Nh*+%+X"*/e'PR6*%ff%ff'H!#\4*,M+J-]d*Bt'"GI*-BV6lff'"*

  , --(Iu %%V!:K
:r@/
GE
!fi8Z
u7!	%&%s		&/%o%/ :

ficVFV

##6-d&Jgt%'Y*d*M*RT*G4%J-X'P6'l&JKV%'dM%@4%'
R*e4%J''S'_#RR6*%>S&OT'*Y#O'->&Mb'*UcR-X
 *
 RGQJ*%>#O'->Q%_&*TGcJ*'*T`%'E*J-%oR`Jc*%J
RJJ*E%#K'g'**%O%tg%66'-*%*#-cROg'*6&6
%R-l*%'M#'*OJ-hxJS6mD'*6K#'%R9`YE-#L'M*VJ-%TqR-%'D%
-*Rg*lg#J*F%*Y#R%'*l-R6%#%'4%JR'L*_'d%''
'*t#Mt-q46MU-R6%#JMZ*@R-LR-O**[%J%*c-R6%#J!O4%J
4#-&xT*-4*yJ-*'4*%RP*yJt-**ccdrQ*R-X-*>`4*%Rl*M`%R
'`%'T'U6c#-r*ocJL&'-Y*b*J**6J2*6Mr*Y'R`*#JU4%JXZc
'Rc%'*-J*-[%M%2***J>-'P'&*!6'T*VJ-MOt%J-
R[M*>Y'*h4%Jb*J**`JMr#4*q%Y'lJR6'*
dO#%&**JJ*X*D`Rfi	*6'U'M*%'*6J--t*K'E'('*
`%'*%-%L->J*%-qhRL*_'R6M%%'n&h%@*6[J#>*%'-%
'*!%9	>#%Z6J-Z*E4%JeMJ>ZG2*6O-(RP'r'*6*(%-
JOO#4*MJO%URJKM%*j-xx-CJU-M*UM%%*6j-F6%-*''
'*dMFO4%R-t`C'-d'['*g*'*TO`'-XMdL&%%e'l*%''
'R6[%%'M%%Jh&'*ER6*#J(%D*-'`*yVJ%SR6*#VJ(%e_%'V'r'*D%R-
sG[#JJ4&%6h&%VP%6R-Y%Y'*%XY'P-'6r#JJb##`
'SO'*R%Js_*'r'*6('Q6JJcJ&J'SR-#O#JJ!##`
'l'-'-#*e'*b#O'->%Y'l*jV%Y*e#'*O%-%Y'P'*6*
fi'('#4R-#%XVG(R-E_R6*#V%%Jb*'*D`%'L@**%J*X'*`J-
'&%'YPO*J-%PqR6*#VJO%g*-'6*yo'UTYJ4'M%*j	O_*J**`J
#'%RS2*EO%6*l'X%*r*Z6*t6JJ*V'*6J--'-Dc-#JFOl%G&&*4
J%*4-RR6#J'L#RT-6'SR6*#%Js!*`%'T2*V6Rfi	*6''M*%4	*6J-

C!ts	

ZOLCSoysoX&

fi %LR-#JXSGF*'-L'*J- *PV6%*%J*S'M* '*6%-d
6'#t'!'!*J- 6-%R-J*X*g'-d6' P(*J-%  s6dF*-6*y
'-C%c-#% c dGbc%D* *J**6J @*M6-%'g'6'd*%- Rn'
R%Js*J-DT4-#J c bM6' 2*P&P%*U*G'*6%-U'MR%JsD*J-
%rR6*#VJ*V*Y%*l**J**`J 2*&RJ4%'OR%JsL@*E6D'*6J-dl#%P%
R-#J>g'&%'DM##(%qR6c#-d*nMR-dRF'R6M%O'[R'-
*D#MJR-'-*eV%%r'*6hV6%M*J**6J[

fi

ff


fi

 "!$#%'&($)+*,-/.
0+12312547698+: ;=<>8@?
filQR-#%X*S#6%'Z#cJ#	2G*J%*q'#tJR#s%*'*6%-QEJlU%Jc*
*%JX**%J&%'U'JL*2*%'r%!%*R*>R-#-'-> *6M%*R
#R*Q
 o4*

 '*_J*-h'* >GPRJ%RE*GJ*-Y
R*
4`MG'T6MJJ*r*%JOM-Mt-G%O'E'-*

%# QPSR $C
*)=R%T /FIH%JLKMKMKNJEF>O U
&(X-.YZ!$Z[+&%(N)\&B)\]^Z!$-)+%]
_$`

BA

WV

CEDGFIHJLKMKMKNJEF>O

fiacb/dSef$d\gQhjiNhkfl"m+noacpSqm+b$lLr=dfSeQpShjs\t
ucvxw
y vffwBz|{~}ff {x wB
vffwBz{}7x
y ff|x
 {x%
y }zx/wff 9{~}ffIB{}7x
7wBB
y ffuuc ff{cvffwffzxu|7u%x{
7wBB
y ff3|z%
}7z7/wx  y ffffffx 
}7z7/wx  y /Lx%ucBzff'{uoffz%
j3XB|3uvffw~SM~SXS-~S~EM%
BMS~S~3Mxwj~jS~~j~j\|M~~3-S\~jc+M~XX\j~M
~3~SM~
ff9+"-'ZS~~~jS~3M~j~~Q3~~jSo7'>~3
S>j~jS~~~jSBff~~SXQ@NxjxW\S3M~S\Xo~>3~j
j~3MX~j->3~$~3M~>Mo @NQBjMj|
^MB|S~3M5%S>3"SX~Y~3LZXj
3o\jM3M~Z\Q-Q9\Zo\~S~>~373o\jS
3~L~~SoffM~o7{B~3Xj'/\jMo\ Z@\=~3M
jMo"% + Z++3o~3M~L\X~S3>7~M/~3M~~\Xj
^Mx~j~j3o\jS3Q|3|$MffEj3MX~/\j
 	 u\~3M'~3fi
 ffucvxw ~3M j3~XS>M~~ +
 9\Z

~LM3\3/MS\M|33o~S\~'MS~ZL3o\j>
ffucvx
w Sj~/3>~3/S~~j
 ffvffwBz{}ff' {x%wB /|S
\j~L\~~j~jS~3~SM~X~"ff|x9{~}ffIB{}7x7
ff7u|7u%x{SvxwBLffzxu|7u%x{\ff3|z% +x7ffxff |
3'ff B+uBzxx'{uSSz%
$S~>3M~3Xj/o+j5 3M  ^ff|x
 {}7xI{~}ff7^ffQu|7u ff{vffwffzxu|7u%x{N/Lx%%ffk
~S3o~3|Xj3o\jc~~j  3$M~QY >  
\~37~SM~3MSc7~M/9
{~SM~+X~SSX~7M~>\~3M>3~M/~SB>SSj/SS\o3~
~3M~~QSx3 +37~3++%/ ^~SM~Wj~S~~j~SM3MS\S
~3jM>BW~3x3c9EMS~-SM~xM+XX7XSXS9~3~ox>jM
X~7S~>3M~S M~o3~7S~~3SoMM\~~j~jj~j9S
%~cXSXSc~37~3M+|M>S7S~x~S7~373~7 ~M/~j7
j~3MS3~3ff3 +Sj~o S~ ~j~j~o$jEXSXSx9~3
S~~~jj~33cS33j~c3 +S~j 
!#"
$&%('*)+-,.,/'10.23+-46578495780:/784():/78+-4<;+-,=)>?=A@(0.'*BC7D:/%E=)1+-4-FG@(4()H:/7I+-4<+-;C2,/+#23+-0.78:/78+-4(0J7I4K78:/0L%'M=#5NB+#@>?5NO3'P:/+
'17D:/%('H,Q,/'1R7I0.'S:/%'TO3+5UV+-;:/%('S)1>I=A@(0.'L+-,C:/+*5'1>8':/'T+#4'S+-;:/%'S2,/+-23+#0.7D:/78+#4(0W784X7D:/0C%('M=-5Y"
Z784)1'SB&'T+-4(>DU[=->8>8+\B
=]0.784(9->8'T%('M=-52,/+-23+#0.7D:/78+#4X;+A,W'M=-)^%X)1>I=-@0.'#_(:/%780W780.0.@'T7I0C4+-:C,/'1>8'1R-=-4`:C%(',/'-"
aYb

ficdegfghi
jlknmi
opopqpr

s
tutvsxwy{zW|G}|G~W}
[]\\MA*V{vApE&p\3SE\`3\X\`MC
{v
SG
6W{SG
LgGWgC
v6G[LAVVA6{-#G<1V
1#(-G
.6
6Cp66GlG\6#6
K`Q1X-6[6`gG1PlA3{xGgLp
L

1NJAVA^`-<G6GA6[3gGE1V
3]GYGgP
 Xp{pE&p\*\{6&X\`M<g6\Ag6g\`3\6\\3&pE&p\`
\ `pMpp{Y\N{\J\3v3v`1\{\33\3&pp{Y\6\V\p\VV{vA
]&`3p&E
QT[{E\`pMpE&p\K6A\pMV{vA]3\\{E6\
3\\P3]`TV\{Jv3-6\ppYV3{\3J&`3p{\[A3[3Q\{Jg6&`Y]
\gN3A\{EVJ3Jp3QT3P3E
3NM`J3&3&pE&p\]p{E&{AEE\
p3v&`\V\6M\\{`3\3*p\MppE&p\3P\\{`3\3Ep{\
M3v{{{\3<gv3Xp\6Ag{\3gQ\E{MpEE&p\\
N\{`3AG\p\3
3{\3g6gX\`\p{]M3&pE&p\-]G\pp{\v`A6\p3[Y&3\M`
p{\{`A`Ap{[M{\3&p\\pg3Wp3vl\{`3\3KVpp{lM&6{QE3
`\p3{3{g\p3WpE&p\`gXVvg`M<&[{A`MX3-`PMKg\\[\{6
\`\pg6\`3TMpE&p`gAM{
3W\{`\`3A3Vg63\p{M\\MK
\`\pM/A` A3V6
3[3{&pMMp3g3CA`ApM\{\`3\3*KVvQ{M
\V{3\p<3QSGYGg
YVp\*KpY\3gJM`-3p{K3LgA\3{A3pA\p{`


\`p6A`\p3EpE&p*M&<\`\pME\{6pE&p`  {P]`3
A`\`3{\3N33YMEM`A3S\E
l`\G\p\\`3\3[3M
\g6V]`3\{v3T`\vE33MYXM`-3Q3M\6\{\M`A3Q3V*]`\
3]EM-3[{3J]{6\A3M{\{{
{\pM{\3&p\\p{{
{
{`\pl3Jp/{A\3{\3&p\\pEME3\K3{{\p3J`3{MN3\{6
A{`Al3]*M-3[  Eg\`M3\{*g3*\&V3S`\<`3`\3M
vM`A33{`\3`3{M[pY\3gE\K3YMXM`A3W?N3MN
SYN\\{`3\A\{\{KG\p \{`\p3SpE&pVApL


3M\`M`3{\3g{l`&p\\3E3K`p6\3M`-3T3<
{` {A3pA\pQ
LSM\&3\`v3{M3T3{3g{lM`K3` AEg
`v3{MX
{v
MLE  N\MMAv\pM\vEg`v3{M[{\\[\{6X\K\X3
\{\`\p6\`3QM\`3{\{{`*\`\pQ?





 6-3C]\`M{A3pA\p3g{` `3{M V\{3M
J\gA\{6\{\3&p\\p{6{&6A	ff8
 X&36g6NL3vL3
M`3]{`n\EgK`3gM
g3A3]\pM{`{\3&p\\pg`
fi 6&33\


AMMA\pMAEgE`3gMg\\\{6\\K3*\\`\p6A`3LM\
`v3{M{{{`*\`v\pQ?



fi !"$#&%ff'()#&"+*,-' ./
021435	687:9&;=<=>@?ACBEDGFIHKJ2HCFILBEACB >@?NMO>PMCQGFR<TS2UVMCQGFI>-HCWNXRQBEYZQ\[B^]_J-DDA`MCQGFJ-?)MOFaYbFaDGFa?M
c B MOFIHdJ cfedgKhjilkmonjiTp MO>qMCQGF2rs>DGWq>-t4MCQGFRuHdAOMv nRhPk U hjiTwyx Y c J-zAOF{[YdQJ-?G|@B}?G|~MCQGF
Y c J-zAOFMO>HCFaJ-D e v njhok U h2iTw_x=jhPk2hj2ow_xg8hjilkmPnRiTp ]ZJ-?D[B}B:]{J-DDA
Y c J-zAOFaAMO>MCQFMCQGFI>-HCWDGFbu&?BE?G|qMCQGF~?GFIXHd>-s>@AdB MCB >@?,
 h2ilkmonji < xfnjhj < {jhPkilmol2mo
 h2ilkmonjijhPk < mo < hyjT${2hokilmoRjmo
 QBEA`HCFILBEACB >@?[YIJ cEc BEM`@d]KBEA8Yb>@?ACBEDGFIHdFaDffJoHCFILB}ACB >@?qMO>MCQGFTuHZAOMfv nRhPk U hjiTwyx Y c J-zACF
B}?MCQGF+MCQGFI>-HCW- m ?MCQGF+>-MCQGFIHQJ-?D4RB tPMCQGF+HCFILBEACB >@?BE?Y c zDFaD,ACJaW-2J-DDB MCB >@?>-t
MCQFqY c J-zAOF eOh2ilkmonRilkGh2w_w{m U x~ sB MRX=>@z c D$&-`Yb>@?AOMCB MCzMOFqJHCFILB}ACB >@?MO>
MCQFv nRhPk U hjiTwyx Y c J-zAOF-_ACBE?YbFqMCQF?GFIXY c J-zAOFB}AP?G>-MACBEff c F\[ m U xf BEAPJ?G>@? 
HdBEB MCBEL-FjHd>-s>@AdB MCB >@?\BE?MCQGFPMCQFI>-HCWG]Z
k BEB c JH c W-Yb>@?ACBEDGFIHMCQFHCFILBEACB >@?Yb>@?AdBEAOMCBE?G|ff>-t8J-DDB}?G|{MCQGF~Y c J-zACFaAI
 w_8`hjiTwyx=`jkl2hj2
 `jkl2h2jk+h2w_wg82hokkGlnRhy
 QBEA2HCFILBEACB >@?+BEAPYb>@?ACB}DGFIHCFaDJ\HCFILBEACB >@?MO>MCQGFffHC>->@ACBEMCB >@? w_8`hjiTwyx 4ACBE?YbFNMCQGF
Y c J-zAOFJ-DDFaDt:>-HMCQGF?GFIXHC>->@ACB MCB >@?BEAffAdBEff c F-  t=QG>XFIL-FIHMCQGFHCFILBEACB >@?B}? 
Y c zDGFaD,ACJaW-@J-DDB MCB >@?P>-tMCQGFY c J-zAOF eO`jkl2hj2k+hjwyw v njhok U h2iTw_xfp
BEMX>@z c D?G>-MRYb>@?ACMCB MCzGMOF~JffHdFILBEAdB >@?MO>MCQJMlHC>->@ACB MCB >@?,GACB}?YbFPMCQGFJ-DDGFaDY c J-zAOF~B}A
?>-M\AdBEff c F[J-?DQGFa?YbFMCQGFHCFILBEACBE>@?JFaYbMCAff>-HCFMCQJ-?>@?GFVYb>@ff>@?GFa?M>-tMCQGF
MCQFI>-HCWG]Z
 >-MOFqMCQJMoB}?MCQGF{Jr>L-F{FbJ- c F-,Jt:MOFIHoX=FqJ c WHCFILBEACB >@?-IMCQGF~u&HdAOMov nRhPk U hjiTw_x Y c J-zAOF
YIJ-??G>-M~rsFzAOFaDVMO>HC>L-FJ-?)WFbGJ-ff c Ffft^>-H~XRQBEYdQ g8h2ilkmonji B}APt^J c AOF[^Eyt:>-HXjQBEYdQ jhPk
ilmoljmP J-?D~FaBEMCQGFIHf< xfnjhj <>-H jhPk < mP < hy2T JHdFMOHdzF]Z  tt^>-H`AO>@FTAdzYdQNFbJ- c F
MCQGFIHCFffJHCFff?G>\Hd>>-tAoBE?MCQFq>-HZB |@BE?J c MCQGFI>-HCWXRQBEYZQ+D>\?>-MozAOFNMCQF{Y c J-zAOF{rFaBE?G|HdFILBEACFaD,MCQGFa?
MCQGF2FbJ- c FRXjB cEc ?G>-M=rFRYb>L-FIHCFaD\rWMCQGFjHCFILBEAOFaDMCQFI>-HCW-FIL-Fa?BEt4B MXTJ-A=Yb>L-FIHCFaD\rWffMCQGFj>-HZB |@BE?J c
MCQGFI>-HCW-  QzATXFNYIJ-?ACJaWMCQJMlMCQGFouHdACMjv nRhPk U hjiTwyx Y c J-zAOFBEA2DBEAdJr c FaD  rWMCQGF~HCFILB}ACB >@?\-
t^>-H=ACzYdQFbJ-ff c FaAI  >-MOFoMCQJM=MCQGFjHCFILB}ACB >@?D>FaA=?G>-MTYdQJ-?G|-F2MCQGFoY c J-ACACB u&YIJMCB >@?>-t,FbGJ-ff c FaAft^>-H
XRQB}YdQ g8h2ilkmonRi BEAlMOHdzGF-J-?DQFa?YbFPMCQGF~Y c J-zAOFBEA?G>-MRDBEACJr c FaDt^>-HlMCQG>@AOF~FbJ-ff c FaAI
k BEB c JH c W-Jt:MOFIHlMCQFoJ c BEYIJMCB >@?>-t_  GMCQF2HC>->@ACB MCB >@? w4``h2i=wyx YIJ-??G>-MHCFIL-Fa?)MJ{Hd>>-t4>-t
J-?W+FbGJ-ff c Ffft:>-HNXRQBEYZQ yjkRjh2j BEAPMOHdzGF[a}_t^>-H~XRQB}YdQ k+hjwyw BEAMOHdzGFJ-?D jhPk
klnjh_ BEANtJ c AOF]Z  tlACzYdQ	J-?$FbGJ-ff c FXTJ-ANz?Yb>L-FIHCFaDBE?VMCQF>-HdBE|@BE?J c MCQGFI>-HdWV>@? c WrFaYIJ-zAOF
w48yh2iTw_x XTJ-AftJ c AOF-MCQGFa?BE?MCQGFRHCFILBEAOFaDMCQGFI>-HCWffMCQFjFbGJ-ff c FjrFaYb>@ffFaAYb>L-FIHCFaD,  QJMB}AI)X=F
YIJ-?\ACJaWMCQJMMCQFjHd>-s>@AdB MCB >@? w_8`hjiTw_x rFaYb>@ffFaARDBEAdJr c FaD  t^>-HTACzYdQFbGJ-ff c FaAIBE?MCQGF2ACFa?AOF
MCQJMIt:>-HffMCQG>@ACFFbJ-ff c FaAIMCQGFHdFILBEACFaD	MCQFI>-HCW	J-YbMCAPOzACM c BE-F\J+MCQGFI>-HdW	XRBEMCQ	MCQFHC>->@ACB MCB >@?
DGF c FIMOFaD4  >-HRMCQG>@ACFPFbJ-ff c FaATt:>-HRXRQBEYZQ yjkRjh2j BEATtJ c AOF-Q>X=FIL-FIHaMCQGFPHd>-s>@AdB MCB >@?\BEA
?G>-MRDBEACJr c FaDrWMCQFPHCFILB}ACB >@?,
 >-HCF|-Fa?GFIHdJ cEc W-BE?MCQGFYIJ-ACF>-t2J-DDBE?G|J c B MOFIHdJ c MO>JVY c J-zAOFXFYIJ-?ACJaWMCQJMMCQGFY c J-zAOFBEA
FbFaYbMCB L-F c WDB}ACJr c FaD\t^>-H2J c}c FbGJ-ff c FaARt:>-H2XRQBEYZQMCQGFqJ-DDGFaD c B MOFIHdJ c B}AltJ c AOF-  Fa?YbF-sB}?MCQGFqYIJ-AOF
>-tTJHCFILBEACB >@?+MO>JY c J-zAOF-4MCQGFAOFIM>-t=FbJ-ff c FaAPt^>-HXRQBEYZQMCQGF?GFIXJ-?MOFaYbFaDGFa?M c BEMOFIHdJ c BEAotJ c AOF
BEAqYIJ cEc FaDMCQGF\`^a3`7_a9)\>-tjMCQGFHdFILBEAdB >@?, k BEB c JH c W-yBE?	MCQGF\YIJ-AOF>-tRJHCFILBEACB >@?J-DDBE?|J
?GFIXY c J-zAOF{t:>-HJHC>->@ACBEMCB >@?X=FYIJ-?ACJWMCQJM2MCQFffHC>->@ACB MCB >@?+BEA2FbFaYbMCB L-F c WDBEACJr c FaDt^>-HJ cEc


fi2&2&@@@
bG-ff a:-TREdCG2sG{-4CGoGIIE-OoE=CCE&a,KRab-}CGoI-Oo-4CIEC @O
qC-@C CE@,@CGPOIT-_bG-ffEaf^-REZCjGff-_CGoGIIE-C2ETCC}aETI-E a
CG~8^a8^y$)-8CGPdIEd @,
2 	8:&
 RGEdEE VOI-PCGdIEd @
 aCbd a--R-E VCG
} OId-	 ff
fi	fi O$CG 

	fi IE-O-EffCGCI-P-EbG-ff a:-
jEd ff
	fifi E~^-EC-! #"%$&"EyCG@Ob-ff& a^-~REd 
(')fi	* -
aECGI, +!
*.-/+	-f 
('0+1+2
3-024ClOZG-5 EE}d -CGlEC&EE 2OIK-
CCIECE@6 &7GaCbd aNs--)-} lCGTIE-O 8-:9ff;
fi<=9>-0	?'@-01'	 
1A
^-qCGB -09ff>
	fi C-@CEC @,y}PCGCI~-l-Efb-ff& a^-~REdC 9;-:	('@-:1'
 
1	A EfOZG-D #"E$F"})CG@O2bG-ff a:-=R}dG *H
EfOdGj- 
?'0
;I
}^-}O-
1j-OC\-=	CIECE@ffO$b@ff@GaCEC& CGd-ff+CI-PbG-ff aC
EGaCEI-ENCGa 8K JabCI)CL @Z aC8-&CGa KO)C-bCET^-dff lI^-K@G8GC@Oa`oCIEC @
Ob@ff@Ga)NEGb&aV CNEC}E CIIG 9G-qbG-ff -`-)CIEC @CNEd aP
b@ff@Gao:--E`bG-ff aoEoI-EEa MGa IC @O N RE N-+CI}C @CPGaP-oEC {
b@ff@Gal^-R-)\bG-ff }I-E aCGP MEdIEd @O N 
IVlR}Eb@CEGIKCG2 -aId-GC-& a OIOCE EqREd{a-Zb@ff@GaE{oCGI-C{aff-
ffQ JICaOI-ydIEd @=ClPEEaOffClb@ff@Ga)I! llEIGO@PCI}C @
~Id OOa2bIdC-Eb@ff@Ga)CjG2G-oj-CGIPb@ff@GaCI	 IV{CC EO~C
CGOI8-? R	:a\CIEC @_OP2Cd TCGI-CB SET5UWV	X_E> @ -aqq R( Y_^% Z&\ [^]`; _-% Z&
` :d@a-Zb@s@a)TEB VOqCGjOI=-4CIECE@KCTasjE aONCb@ff@GaL a
^-RffCGI-Cb@ff@Ga b `dc bFeT}CGOIl-8CIECE@=CR&E aOf b
lG@O -aGId-fs@dC  {OI-=CIEC @2}P@GEREd-+-saC-@C C @+-~I}-O
ECGffCI-C+aECEa^-~-CIP-bG-ff aag lGICI^-C-4=C+CCIEC @
bC @ ` }, ]` RI& Rh _@VEs^-=a-d\-aC-@C C @ff-TIE-Cjb@ff@Ga, biHV--)
OIl-`bG-ff a2 jfCGICbGEOC ki `c bFeCZC j	ETCG~}CEE NOIl-ff 

lDmEnmporq;stuDv8whx;y

o -aCd VCGI-C-OI-{b- aIo=VRECOsO@ffVCGI-dCE
b@C}OOa)jR CCG~bG-ff aa&CZC2CGNCGI-CER-C-EE:d@CGqEGGCI-C
OFz GabaR-yIdEOOa\CI}C @I{* -C^-d-EED|
} (8~ `:%&Z %$L\6@L?Lp$g%$/SETUWV	XDG/$KEPDFE# ` G%$WT{
` &Z __8^:T   LLf$%)$@?$K5  %$K/$$Wh%kF$/L$LD$5$L&h#!FF0
@B$K@$WFE%$	d$L%&b  V  $K/$  i `dc b  e  L%
T8F c bDUF(  c b  ULLLU  c b  U/T>eeeK"
G9 -b@-a ab-y  ` EoGdaOOdEbOa,s={C-C ` -CEffE\daCTy EZ yy8:
^C@T 
lG~Cd} C-& aGCGa,&ElOCI}OP-ab@ff@GaCROCj-},-8CG@  -a@C C -
-@GP-yC6@  -aGL@ CE-~bG-ff ald~b-ICaCGNGICGI-Cd|
&

fi2(?pQ(D2DO?p
(ff>h%D>D&h%D;!?>&;E;C>D>%5O68kEW>6L
 hd?5fG@K?Lpgd:EEED%/E5W / E D&EE P LL  Q(WK 
  	D  K	
E 5gH%/B ff#K\ F@hdK     L%? Lf%5 g ) C 5 E P 
 K.G%/  h% ,%L {hL !/L  

EW ?>%ff%  
G

E5W>



 









%

XY4EBQ?



fi

-/.10fi23465








	

ff

fi	



&

 













fi



  

"!#$



' "(*),+

87:9<;=fi5<>@?5;
ACBD=fi4EBF9<GfiHIBJK>L0*=fi0FMENOBP0fi5QHI=fi45=

R>L0

S2?TEBFG S.U9<G WV

Z>@05<?I2?GfiBQ0*=*G>@3=*BQTSGfiBF[K>@0fi>C9\?S.2?3=fi>C9\?]M^NB_TEG9<`S=fi4EB Z5<?TaNbG>@=*B"c,cedf"gh

V,-ff?

=fi4>@0"3F5<0*B<Me=fi4EBP9\?ACHIGfiBQ0*=*G>@3=fi>@9\?69\?`i9\00fi>C;ACB_GBF[j>@0>C9\?0b>@0k\>C[<BQ?;^Hl=fi4EBm0*BF="9<.9<`iBQ?n39\op`e9\?EBQ?^=fi0
DV

q"9<=*Bl=fi45=p>@?r=fi4Ba3F5<0*BI9<.s2?EGfiBQ0*=*G>@3=*BQTrGBF[j>@0>C9\?0P5t0fi>L?Ek\ACBuGBF[j>@0>C9\?v=*9wBQ5<34x9<`iBQ?x39\op`e9\?EBQ?^=
>@0y>@?r`G>@?3F>C`
ACBp0fi2KzS3F>CBQ?^=FM0fi>@?3BS50fi>L?Ek\ACBZGfiBF[K>@0fi>@9\?r3F5<?xT>@0fi5;
ACBZ539\oZ`i9\?BQ?8={.|9<Gm5<?}5Gfi;>C=*G5GH

H

0fi2E;
0*BF= 9<.BJE5<op`ACBQ0FV6~9<GfiBF9[<BFGQM=fi4EBu9<GTEBFGy9<.GBF[j>@0>C9\?0 >@0P>CGfiGfiBQACBF[5<?^=FV6"?EGBQ0*=*G>@3=*BQTrGfiBF[j>L0fi>C9\?0

&
\


5GfiBI5<0fi0fi2oZBQTr>@?oZ5<?8Hr=fi4EBF9<GfiHwGfiBF[K>@0fi>C9\?0*HK0*=*BQoZ0{>@?v=fi4EBaoZ5<34>@?EBSA@BQ5G?>@?EkA@>C=*BFG5=fi2EGB

_9<``eBQA

{ 

BF=Z5<AVCMQ<EDD2EG0*=*9\?~9^9\?BFH<M"Q<E">@345GT0p~9j9\?EBFH<M"Q<K M5<AC=fi49\2Ek\4x>@?}=fi4EBI-/c



,

A@>C=*BFG5=fi2EGfiB<Mj[5G>@9\20,GBQ0*=*G>@3=fi>C9\?0,9\?a=fi4EBsGfiBF[K>@0fi>C9\?S.U2?3=fi>C9\?u5GBD5<00fi2opBQT





0*BFBDXwGfi9<;eBQA ffQ<< R5<?T

9<=fi4EBFG1N9<Gj0GfiBF.UBFGfiBQ?3BQT =fi4BFGfiB V-/?P=fi4>@0`
5`iBFG=fi4EB45GT?EBQ0fi0 :jBQ3=fi>C9\?mjV 5<?Ty0*9\2?T?EBQ0fi0]GfiBQ02AC=fi0

6



:jBQ3=fi>C9\?xjV P4E9\A@Tv.U9<Gm56N>@TBZG5<?Ek<BS9<.GfiBQ0*=*G>@3=*BQTGfiBF[K>@0fi>C9\?v.U2?3=fi>C9\?0FMN4>@ACBp=fi4Bu=*G5<3=fi5;>LA@>C=H
GfiBQ0fi2AC=fi0 :jBQ3=fi>C9\?njV R5GfiBP0fi49N?l.U9<Gb=fi4EBy3F5<0*B 9<.2?EGfiBQ0fi=*G>@3=*BQTIGfiBF[K>@0fi>C9\?a.2?3=fi>C9\?0FV

Cffh

G


K2E``e9\0*BlNOB5GfiBk\>C[<BQ?5r0*BF=S9<._9<`iBQ?39\op`e9\?EBQ?^=fi0

s



.|9<GS=fi4EBtg"c

=fi4BF9<GfiHu39\?0fi>L0*=fi>@?Eky9<.=fi4EB"G0*=O3FA@5<20*B".|9<GD"dDKcedsR5<?TS=fi4EBD5<?8=*BQ3BQTEBQ?^=bA@>C=*BFG5<A

(

g,ds~-*gRp>L?w=fi4EBSAL5<0*=P3FA@5<20fiBZ.|9<GpDd_KcedsO

TEBF`>@3=*BQT>@?v>Ck\2EGfiBaI;^Hw2?E7

TBFGA@>@?>L?Ek VbBF=D20s5<A@0*9S5<00fi2opB{5<0"k\>@[<BQ?n5<?n2?EGBQ0*=*G>@3=*BQTGfiBF[K>@0fi>C9\?l.2?3=fi>@9\?]Vfb4>L0
GBF`GfiBQ0*BQ?^=fi0{=fi4EBl0fi>C=fi25=fi>C9\?}>@?N4>@34v=fi4EBIBJK`eBFGfi=yN"4E9k\5[<B20y=fi4EBS=fi4BF9<GfiH>@0{0*9\opB7
N"45={2?0fi2EGfiBu9<.4EBFGpTEB
?>@=fi>C9\?w9<.sD"dDEcidsRM5<?T0*9t>@?T>@3F5=*BQ0P=fi45={>C=fi0PG0fi=
3FAL5<20*BZoZ5Hn;eBp=*9j96`eBFGoZ>@00fi>C[<B<M]5<?Tv5<A@0fi9l=fi45= =fi4EBZ5<?^=*BQ3BQTEBQ?^={A@>@=*BFG5<AWgR,"d"~-*g
>L?=fi4EBmA@5<0*=D3FA@5<20fiBy.U9<GPDd_Kced"RoZ5QH?E9<=D;iB{?EBQ3BQ0fi0fi5GH<V fb45=D>@0FMi=fi4EBy=fi4BF9<GfiH
5<0bk\>C[<BQ?6>@0R=fi4EB_;eBQ0*=R9\?EB_=fi4B_BJj`eBFGfi=3F5<?63F2EGGfiBQ?8=fiA@Huk\>C[<B<ME;2=b0fi4EB_5<A@AC9N0R=fi45=b0*9\opB
`
5Gfi=fi0O9<.=fi4EBs=fi4EBF9<GfiHuoZ5HZ;eB"oZ>L0*=fi5<BQ?]VWE9<GRBJE5<op`ACB<MK=fi4EBs.U5<3=O=fi45=R=fi4EBs5<?8=*BQ3BQTEBQ?^=
AL>C=*BFG5<AhsdD^7hsdsq"D>@0_?E9<=Pou5Gfi<BQTv5<0_`e9\0fi0fi>@;ACHI
5NBQTvoZBQ5<?0_=fi45= >C.=fi4EBmG0fi=
_d_Kced"R3FA@5<20*B>@0>L?3FA@2TEBQTM=fi45=W5<?^=*BQ3BQTEBQ?^=A@>@=*BFG5<AKoy20fi=5``iBQ5G\=fi4EBb3FA@5<20fiB
ou>Ck\48=D;eBmTEBQACBF=*BQTtBQ?^=fi>CGfiBQACH<M]9<GD9<=fi4EBFGP5<?^=*BQ3BQTEBQ?^=PA@>C=*BFG5<A@0"ou5QHn;iBm5<TTEBQTn=*96>C=FMe;2=



=fi4BPh"d_^7hsd"qsD5<?8=*BQ3BQTBQ?8=DA@>C=*BFG5<AeoZ5Hl?E9<=b;eB TEBQACBF=*BQT]V

F

gO9\?0fi>LTEBFG?E9N=fi4EB_BJK5<oZ`ACB 0*BF= }39\?0fi>@0fi=fi>@?Ekm9<.=fi4B BJK5<oZ`ACBQ0F

  {h"d_^7bDfbf"_~rM-*_h"fR7:XYW-fiDhsf_MhsdDj7/gbDq_gRds-fffR{M





scWXtds"7/gbDq_gRd"-fffRmMiK~nd"WMDy\MiA@5;eBQACBQTl5<0b`e9\0fi>C=fi>@[<B<M
{h"d_^7bDfbf"_~rM-*_h"fR7:XYW-fiDhsf_Mhsd_^7/Kfb"dXMhsdD^7hsdsq"DMhsdDj7
gDqDgds-/f{MbscWXtd"""7/gbDq_gRds-fffR{M"E~ds,M"gR,"d"~-*gs\MDAL5;iBQA@BQT
5<0"?EBFk\5=fi>C[<B<Mi5<?T

Q1:e:fii
:,|$F$i |$%%esuR::<%:%:fi
%<ff/:%e::%
:<%:% esI]:/:%


fisj
s
\\\



"



s,bfiDsm/1"RZD,

s,*_"



sD^bD"D

/1"R



D"DKesRmfiDsR:,*_"

_,,



sD^/DDs/msWts"/bD_R"ffR

_,,



sD^/Eb

__Ke"R



sD^ss"D

__Ke"R



Kn"



	ff
fi

	 

Z,s*

Rs



 

	 

ps



"!#$%&

!"!'	()!)*)+,,!"*.-

"_^bDb"_65*_"R:YWfiDs5s_^/Kb"75sD^ss"D5sDj

/10243

DDs/45
Kns985

,

(		: 5

""*(

!)*

"_^bDb"_65*_"R:YWfiDs5s_^/Kb"75sD^ss"D5sDj

/;243

DDs/45sWt"""/bD_RsffR45eKs<85


< 

L 
D

/
 

	>=*"(?!)@$A:9 
M*)"	!#N9 

ff

& 

D"DKesR

RV(J

(J>$C%&"(Y/10!)*L/
I)(J 5  

Y)!)$X:+(/

Z

JG
;





Eblk


-

5




__Ke"R


(+,!)$/D
 



#	:^,(	!.-

,,4!", 

!W 

/0\!>/

,(J\ 

/1w243



J_ 

+ 



 

E$C%&,



1J&*)*F 


E),*c



KsmmsD^
Z

I(1%G*)

o*),(	T,,!Q(J_NK 

>/D>,(K,(J#*,(	"*o 

D"DEisR

(	"$!)*



Y	:^,(	!FJ& 

!)*O(Jc!L/

/ZL,(c,!q 

+%GI!
=W,!)$

>	:^,(	!Gb)I*

)	
5



)

 

5 b	(B,(+(	SRT	!_,(B)! 

,(<(J"$!*_	:^,(	,!

(<>(		I(JNn$J+&)	NT 

 

(	 

\I)(Jihjf

!)*o/; 5
0

/

FbV*)( 5
,("-

;

Xv$!)(+,*Y 



4R+(	
!"*

5

,)(J4rsNtJ

>$C%&,fi

"_^bDb"_65*_"R:YWfiDs5sDj/bD_RsffR45
sWts"/bD_R"ffR485


 

""*(

,($C%&F,(>T		,),VoI!xJ	"(		,!#

rs$V*),!Jff={u[,(E|}(J	,~ 5 ,!\ 

 

,



!_,	(>,(	(	RT	!i(>)!$A:	"*`-

N[=i!L,!':,I*)J1 
1	 

E>I,



Xb: 5

!*F/;P$X:	"*

*)*)I!c 
 

(	,	:-

R+(J]	:^,(	,!L,(Y),,"*TuV-





0

,!L 

 

,%G,,V 5

,!)$	+"$	c,(+(	SR"*`-

4!m,J+.I(J+)ffNn1

!)$A:	"*pq 
+:,(+!



]	:^,(J"*MJ>!9$A:< 

,)(Ja 

Id,!)\/

!'J"$"*"!'M,,J+<e[fgJ# 5

,s*P5

$C%&"(I!QU<-

Y!	:Y$C%&,E/1Z 5  [!\

P*"	!_N` 

""*(

AE: 5 =F%G"ffHB	:I(J"*JK$A:

"!O!'J"$"*"!',J+

G*"(		"*Q,(+(	SRT	!(1NE 

+"$	M$X:+(9 



B$C%&B/>D-

,

M 

(J>

"A

(J"!(JY 

K$!,)(	!.-



+"(P$!'	,!O(+) 
5

(	,	:-

")(JOyTz_H(+(	&+:,(+!iJQ=p!
>,( 5

 

<!> 

)(]=i,(]!]

_Nn$ 

M/w\,(!ff

!"(<J 

YH"!_$%&

1++,Nn]/1w-

"
!"!x	(



PNn$

(J	M,!Nn+%G	!O,(Ns)!)*)%G"!x	.!*

,"^(Y&d	>I! 

		 

5

(

,!-

IO)X{@'"

"(JJ 

ff*"$)	:>(+,%&,IGN[ 

	!)

 

 =<+1

st__@^nxXnH

)+"%

5  

	F	 

+"(YNn&I*1V!>N[	:I(	!FNn!)$	!)(N@NtIHKo

5



,!G,(,!xJV$	Nn)	

M(	" 

&+:,(+!FNn)!$	!_Nn

Hrs"u]$!'	,!)(\+:,(+!F 

,(Y)!)	"(JJ+,$J"*L,,A1(*"	!.-

X

(	

*"J"(-



"+ 5

N@



fiY^)'XS'6T&Y)xTXo`))

4?

JffXT<AtXnH?Y@)[@"Q?o_@		$AtVQH"s{xst{

x"ss){B`>].Ms<+JJ[>IPP]J+H""

     
 ff

 	
      
  ! 	
#"      %$
& 

	'$(!
)" !
fi	 !
*

+ 
 -,
." 
,0/ 2 1 8: 79 3?; A@ C: B?9 3?;
3465 ;<465>=
;D465FEG
H JI LK M !N 3O; !
 &
P 

G 7B
Q R
TS =
U V W 5YX WZ X\[[[X W
1
W 5 V
W 5 V 5.5
 =
 EG 5.5
W 5 V 5
W 5 V
5
W Z V EG Z B`5 ]
W Z V = Z 75 ]
 EG
 =
W V
W V
= 1 7^
EG 1 Ba^
1
1
V
_
V
b
5.5  5.5
5.5  5.5
G
=


V _
V b
= 1 7D^
G
1 cB?^ 
1 B?^  
 F!
  1 7^ 
!d 
e gf
hf
i!
 
  j,kml n
 

	 
 ) 
 
3O; V _ 3?; ! 3?; V b 3?; ol o
ff c
p  	) 

 = q  qG'l srt
 )

fi	 J  ff * 
uff  uv)

w
	H  
xiygr #z
{|
'r
fi	 
 fiff 
  %
  fiT ff

 
D (
ff  fi	 !
} 
#" P,k   
 P 
_ 3O; 6  
P 




~
ff
k
ff



P



6




	

3O;
_

V
_
V
  3?;  
  3?; = 3O; F
  3?; J	 fiff 	 3?; wff   
fi
) =         = k
 	 = 
fi	 !
  H       
fi P,k

 

R w! ),0/ @ X
@- X
!
. ! 	
fi	 F
ff
. !
= G  E8= fiff
EG ) 
h  	
 
. ! 	   P  fi

  C   	 fiff 	 ?    	 V z* C  fi
 H  !
=

>`+ff{+J^],B"	_J&JP	)YB


	 fiff


 "c	b .+ ,+)<^

B

91Y

,1P



	V),

L	

)I

JKE>,	J

		, T

91]M?P@	I)$1EKL+"+F,

<ff	)	_		, t^,

T

ff4JE

G	4		, T T , 
##+	 

t

	  H

,

$)	IJ	,





J	 K

 iV11	



)$	

H+	 

I H

]		 

G"x{J	

)	

		,) `		
n

,



,J	,)$V

)+ H+	)

t	

 IJ

 



t )

L,

)	

 _,		

, 7b



	

HY+ 	 &,

"'	L 4



.\

IJ+ ,I



G



ff

Vx)	

"'	K,Q

{< 



.

H

 ^





91]\s<+KJT

) b	

,J+ IV4,

o	)Q	L 4$

K	 I	)JF$

)$"	)4 , J





,9	+ 

 & x	KJ_J 	

 )	YxJ"$ )"x

s ,J)	"

 ^ GI '	 &,

) 	,

 ^,

>		, t^,

IJ+

	)E'J"$ "'
	



4J 

KJ 	&+	 

&"'

 ) G, H	 &>,	)>	 

)	

n

,

G





B++ ,+6Ji

#	)4	)F"  	)F$	+"
 I





	,	)@),VM		I "

	,	

,^$	 ]	ff]P

) J `

?

)+ H+	)E	

	& , )	

			X,{
" )I

)	

"'	O )+ H+	)] , )	"_

,JV ,,

,JV ,ff,6	 , )J"

	+)I

)	

1")$' H	Y	+\

,JV .,



 	# 9	M'J"$ "'

+ G	 

1Px#JK

 n@ 	)

,JV

J

 91]J

i	)Al	)

G"1O JV	]P

	cs1"$"		+ 



 GJ	I

E)+ 9A	]		





H_ 		W$

Ic	)

,+L	+ )

,



O 	xJ"$ "'

	 ^,	





 ^ G, 	 &P

,"B

K	>	+

1JO	)c	



  & 

^+

+

n

)+

&"'	)



1A

,

s$

 , )JT



),



"



b

)+ G	 FxJ"$ "'
O , )JF

x

L	]$	+"

,JV b$	+"



),



)

_J is Y	L'J"$ "'

s ,Js {	M'J"$ "'

,J+ H

fisFT\sT



H
H
H


THFH




















H
H
H














8
Y



HFTH


8
Y


























 >
 
8fiF*fiYcC(+!Tfic'cw!H0 g6s    YC     D  >Y
!!.!0!..!!qi.i
fi.8'!!A  Yk!*.H'.cFsfi!i
 qu  qk  qH
!wg.w!fiF)*!TDHC!.sPFfi!.p+!q.
wJfipfi8DDPw#qC.J!'.&-Dfifi!i*.cF!&k
)P(fifi(++8fi  w.J!!w.hp(
!i  qu  qk  qH
J &i86>g6!~YgR~0~!8gg<68cF
w!!!!fiCJ~!C*!sqfiiDw(fipg!!AT!!!
'!...w.k
s!fi 8i.fi #
6fiA k}!fi
!..D!fiPigA.fiLq.J.6HT!! Cfiu
!..
(fi c!fi  J~so!.. 
 k! \.
 	C 

fi!fio!fi<Dff
 
h&\!HFou!!!!fi .!}!!
fi J!fi
 T(fi!*.JiJ!fi\(fi\.pJ>Hs Cofi C
(.h)!>u.))fi.
 Cu JfifiLp}!

hq&!!ss!AT!uJ!)(fi.!k.)!u!s.Tfi
k-q Cq.fis()fiqk C.qfiTfiHH
Y(.ofi!s!Y!fi k) u.).Ls.Tfi
!Fu&#!.fiL!L *fi.J.)FfiA

hJFT!!

fipYJ!fi(fi&!.fi
 8YcT

gP *
g


g- L  YD >  >
 g 8D >  



8(6cT
P(6cT

 
<; <= '87#3!?>:@6$%BAC6$%D'E,<6$F5(*6$%#3%G+ H ; I>
 "!$#&%')(*'+-,&./'10324#5+".*#768:9
J 6$85'K2L'10<#&2L#<MN#7O1'FP(Q2L#
7R  J A
<;PS
7R 3WYX "F?2L'$8Z2[9 = N
?
> 8T#U(*'$"8V'0324# J 6$8
A ?>
J 6$8\'>&#]+_^`6 J 2L'10<#&2L#<Ma#7O'$F5(b2L#3>E J A
<;PS
?>87#c('$?8T'10&2L# J 6$85^ W

^

g- L

!(fi&.-)!>}J!&H!fiwp}fi*c
JofiwJ>sJqfi.oc.s!
(C)   W # Ww(fi
de

fifYg*hjikhGl/mLnmokprqbsCfYtju1qbgpwvhkji/tjmLxGy

z4{}|~}7&T<37$GL:5~TK7G$}zLD7&~7z4{7&bzL<$GLE?~|3*CbL\{T&Q7]|?~]:
~]|a3~C~|]|Y7&7EKj{TY3z4{TN7&/zI{7zL~|*~{7{7zLbLN|G4@*Pjz4:ffz4{Y]|jzL|"~
ff?"b_*}Gb?"bG/"b1_""bb"* }E<7TEI&
 ?Q/B*-3*134C"*<$Z<P:)<$5*Q3G)$bff&]VEo1:347a<1$5b4ZP
 NDT&?:@$ff$ff1&ffIK:3jLK3P :j3<?Z"< "*3Z?&K7&*Z5T
 &T~{7G&3]{7{Tj7&~7G$7<Gz4|Nz4{ Q|jjz4|\]|jzL|7&*z4{7zL~|j{]  jz4{ z4{{T&]|a/z4N{<z4CGL
7]jG37zL~|?<~ 5  T~) 5T\jPGz4<ffz4{P4z4|]$Yz4|r E[
K /G/ "$&a*-3/1&LbT:*Z"@$b$"*<$Z<P<N$b	V$"j"]&Vffo<347
7$5b4ZPB ?77]@&LK-N) }"?E?Q<$E"r Eo
B  "~4L~Pz4|ffL~<z47j {T~L]{B)Q }  _zL]|  )P7 {Bff{7j<~7z4|  
z4]z4{T~&7?~:N]|jzL|a7&/zI{7zL~|ff~|]<w~]|3~C~|]|K"<]&4_7G$P7K|jI7&*z4{7zL~|
z4{Y4{7~7&*z4{7zL~|b:
B 	ff
 <Tfi

 P

G





 jz44  
1  ~~{7B!
"QD"
U
b
"ff
":34

"#%$'&)( 

&   <  7T*
,+ 5.-j7&7j<| + P.-/
j7I*
102
,5)]6 78

9 ;:P&7<|<)
z4;
{ =C7 \?>A@:P&7'@ z4{7B3~CbL3*z4 ~
{T~L*z4|C))P7\G{7z4|G37&7Ez4{ ~|jE&4~ 57 ?~]:3~NQ~|j]|1z4|a

+ zL<{TY|~T7G$7jB3~CGL3zL D~_7B4~<zL7j
5~

{<~

7j$7CL~<z47j {T~L]{ 5   + zL<{T{7j~{T\7j$N<P5z4{57&Gz4<$GL
z4{{T&~<&/z4{<zL~|j{B7G$KG7~/Gj3]{\7&Gz47]r7j&~7 "7~ 
z4|r~7&)~<G{&$\7jD]|j ~7L~<z47jff  &I{7{7zoG]{K43*CbL]{\zI|r 3~77]374  ~
{T&B7Gz4{&j3~|j{7zI&Y7G$7:j$GLB7j&~7 B
 "<
 I)~|ff]<wzLT&<$7zL~|a~/
 C*T&  &?~<B7EL~/~
&z4|j{&  <    <}|jr{7~z4{7&bzL<$GLC/{7{7jNj7zL~|P"T&E]: 3*]&7zL~|r~Y7
~/jr~7L~/~))wj$T B
 <
 4D
 
"j7
 ?:<
 E0F6G 7KPjzI<z4{NI{T~ 7&Gz4<$GL{7z4|j3
 z4{KQ]|GzL|H
 ]|	7ffL~/~T&:Nz4|j$T]{&   /)]|j3    1KzI{\<&GzL<$G4w"/ 7ffL~/~

ff3~|1T]|G	7j$~TG	

IKJ

fiLNMOPQSRUT)VXWNRUY8Y8Z8[

\E]_^2`ba*\E`c]Fd*e*f/g;h_ikjlBmUn	ikjodp?qE`cjjo\1r!st`cqEquwv`cnxqEuyj\z]|{Hpw}caoaouypwdoqEsc~kjo\E]kpwuN]}}cxuy]3pw}8nx}8]uy]_doj`baou
`y^b`c\EqE`bUq1ud}taou?x`c\Eayf
 }8]_^cu?ajuyq1sc~B\Er;l/;\Ej']}cdNaou?x`c\1a*`bq1uc~dohu?aou;\EqEqu%]}3uy]k\18]aou?x`c\1ajNd}<`c]_s)pw}8nx}8]uy]_doj?~
`c]khkuy]kpwudohu"`cq1c}ca*\1dohkn;\EqzqUau?doia]<;./f

Hu"\EqEq]}Gjoh}Gh}Gd}|aouykikpwudohu"xkao}cq1uyn}crU]k\E]%uy]\18]3aou?^\zjo\1}8]kjd}tdoh`bd}cr]kk\E]
jdo`bqEuuwv`cnxUq1uyj?f/\1ajdu;\zqEquwU]u'dohu"]k}cdo\1}8]<}cruwv`cnxUq1ujdo`b\Eqz\1ds3n}caouxkauyp?\Ejuyq1s
<_K!UNFbUEz'?Gk8_2_,w	cw_wEt!bAl/" ?b?b?*
!b*lm_?b!UF?1/*bXl/lme/%;!1bA2B4?Kk8UKwtl/; ?b
wcwAF?cU_wE|!obADlmzlmeX|?Gk!!l% !z|w!w%wFw)cbwoo
bwFw3bcwoow3l/w
Hu	n|`ys<]}GuwU]udohujodo`b\EqE\1ds|xka}cq1uyn`cjr!}8qEq1}K;j?f
<_K!U4N2/UGK!U?Gk!A2!;l/'oew
 |cwFwE!bAl;"cU<bo_bU1?bNl
<_G_b!U	 4wFw|bcwoo3bNAF?|bcwoowtl/;Ao?Ak ;wFw
*bb?2 zwFw|U*bb?2cUDc!wA?y
ghuy]u"hk`G^cu"dohk`bd?
  2!b?%cw_wE'.*2*cUbS!obA)l/Nwb|Dbzwcz*o)bcw
%
 NbUb!ky?"<F*wEoffo_bU1wt{'SS2"cbUbb!ffoobk?wE
_N
2 Hu3xkao}K^cu|dohuDdohu?}caouyn _s8\1^\E]`c]`cq1c}ca\1dohn;hk\zphpw}8]kjodaikpwdoj%`uy]k\18]Hau?x`c\1ayf
ghu`cq1c}ca\Edohkn}caj'\E]dS}<jdo`bcuyjyf"\1ajd?~Su%U]d}joiUju?doj;}cr{/`3ju?d'}cr?GbcKU
uwv`cnxq1uyj~;hk\Ep*h<`baoudohuuwv`cnxq1uyjr!}ca;hk\Ep*h  n	ikjoduk\zjo`bq1uy
	`c]k`ju?d}crKG_8G_
uwv`cnxq1uyjfiff~/hk\Eph`baou3dohuuwv`cntxq1uyj%r}ca;h\Eph  n%ikjd]}cdu3\Ejo`bq1uyBfuwvd?~ikjo\E])dohu
`cjojoinxkdo\1}8]Hdoh`bd	}8ia%aou?^\Ejo\1}8]r!ik]pwdo\1}8]\Ej	ik]aouyjoda\Epwduy ~Supw}8]kjdaipwd	`)aou?^\zjo\1}8]Hd}  ;hk\zph
k\Ej`bq1uyj  r}ca;dohuuwv`cnxq1uyj\z] id]k}cdr}cadohk}8ju"\E]fff
fi   l/  {
 f ff  !	
" f;k}ca;uy`cphfft#  {/
 `Fe3 $
r fi% '
 ()l*,+ .- o%e0/$# ~dohuy] 213+G - 	
 & fi
!eD $
r fi% '
 ()l$*,+ 4- 5*,+ 4- oe6/$# ~dohuy]ff ff71+G - 	
 & fi
< ~kaou?doia].9	
8 f r92:;ff=>
?A@

fiBDCFEHGJI.EK!LNMOLPIJQSRUTVBDWHX,RUC.Q3Y
EZIHG!WHLN[\

]_^`)acbedZf
gih,jlknm$oqp b hZrhZrJs dAtudAv_d rJs a pNs dxw h azy
p ^ knm$|}~ yHwd s w rs{ dqwdx
pcp ^'`)acbedZy pNm9}>~ yHwd s w r;s{
pcpp ^`)acbedZy_wd s w rFk9
gj `)acbedZy_wd s w rh wdx p b pNr;5pNs{

s{ d r f
p b pcr;s{Hhs _v dAaNd s dAb o.
d rJ aawdx p b pNr

v p b h a pcr_ bed s

b  t {s{Hhs 7hZr v |7;=}~ ^

 4  y pNs5p bd h be se bedxd s{Hhspcm9hZr v |h wd r_Zs v p b pcrJs y s{ d ri9p b r_Zs wdx hZp w h aNd m w9y
b pcr tud pcr b  t {h t h bed hs aNd h b sr dldu hZ aNddu p b s b {p t {i9 b sh actxa h bb pP dAb pcr t  wwdAt s aNZ^
 r ZdxwbedAaNZy pNmip b r_Zs wdx hZp w h aNd m wV9y s{ dxwd p aca  d hs acd h b sVr d;du hZ aNd {Hp t {p b
b sh actxa h bb pN dAv pcr t  wwdAt s acZy hZr v s{Hhs du hZ UaNd p acab {_46  prZs{hZr v | ^d r tudZy s{ d
mihZp a  wdqt r v pNspNrp bDb hsp b  dAv
^
 4 b    bd s{Hhsi95p bwdx hZp w h aNd m w9^qdVb {_. s{Hhss{ dfi hs t {Hh aNd s{ d  w 4 U D}
HgioOj,4o.,p bwdx hZp w h aNdZy hZr v { d r tud p b  d rHpNr ^  r b p v_dxw r_.2s{ db shp a pcs  Zm du hZ UaNdAb
pcr4   f
 .  5  v  dAb _r Zs b sh aNtxa h b b Np m  hZr du hZ aNd pcr t  wwdAt s aNZyUb pcr tud op bv p b h aNdAv m w
 pcr4   y Zh r v  |{ d r ut dfilfi gi$,4o.,4o.  j }6
 $ ^
 .  5  v  dAb rHZs b sh aN;txa h bb pNm  Zh r ;du hZ aNd |pcr t  wwdAt s aNZyb pcr tud oqp b r_Zs v p b h aNdAv
m w pc
r 49 5  y Zh r v  6{ d r ut dfilfi gi,4o.  j }0
 $ ^
 aNdD Fgi|jpcr t  wwdAt s acZyb pcr tud'wd h wvaNdAbb
 .  5  v  dAb _r Zs b sh actxa h bb pcm  hZr du hZ U
ZmD5{ d s{ dxw  w r_Zsop bv p b h acdAv m wfiy 
 Zs{ V
'lfi) gi,4o.,4o.  j }
 $ y hZr v
V
'lfi) ig 95,4o4  j }0
 $${_ acv
^
 pcr ut d  )   s{ dxwd m wdv  dAb r_Zs b sh actxa h bb pNm  hZr ldu hZ aNd pcr t  wwdAt s aNZy pNsDp bwdx hZp w h aNdZy Zh r v
{ d r ut d 
 p b  d rpNr ^

d rH4 txa  bd s{ dt p wtxacd  lHw   pcrHVs{ dqdA p  h acd r tud Zm   hZr v   ' `f
U.H.>
'UqJ'7xeHfiFZFxFZUfiziA
 O

m w {
  
hZr v r aN

{Hhs)  t hZr dfiwdAv  tudAv se   ` pcr   aN r_pch a spc d m  aca . bqv p wdAt s ac
hZr v!^ knrs{ d Zs{ dxwv p wdAt sNp r y   5' ` gi9q  jfis w p  ph ca aNwdAv  ut dAb se
d  wd  
b
giuJ    Oj95{ dxwd }>)g  j y   r_Z spcrHs{Hhsi9p bwdx hZp w h aNd m  w J    pcm
pNm  p b r_Zs b sh acd pcri9 ^


  
	fiff	!	$	ff4!"i#ff
$

p Zd r s { 
d wdAb  a s b ZmDs{ dwdx pc bbedAt spNr y  ;
d bedxd s{Hhss{
r aN Np m v_d s dxw pcrpcr_ du hZ UaNdb shp a pNs  p b s w h t s h acdZ^ { d
p bxfD { d r3p b   5' ` gihZr v { d r tud )   D
j s w h t sh aNd&%

')(

d  w  hs t {HpcrHp b s w h t sh aNd pNmDhZr v
 dAb spNrSh vHv_wdAbbdAv pcr s{Hp bbdAt spNr
kr,spNsp ZdAaNZyv_d s dxw prHpcr_ b shUp a pNs 

fi*,+.-!/!02135476,18989:9;
<>=?<>@ACBED)FGAHDJI!KL5<>M,BNLO.<>=N<P9@Q=RACPSDTFGP9UWVXP9@QLY@AZUWDY[I\P)AH]^VXLBEUW<A@_L`aVQBHP.P)M=?D)@QbcBHLY=CACBN<>FGA?P9K>b
P9@_LY=dfe,LACLBNUW<>@!<>@_ghAH]_Li=CAHDJI!<jK><Ak[fP)MlD)@LGm_D)URV!KLfn]_LY@QFGLi<AH=o@_LLYbACP5I\LBNLV!D)<BHLYbpqUWDY[AH]_LY@
BHLYr.sQ<BHLtFGP9@!=H<>b_LBN<j@_guD)K>K_V\P9=H=H<IKLvFGP9UwI!<>@!DJAH<P9@Q=xP)MyFGP9URV\P9@_LY@fiAH=z`l]!<>FN]WFGP9s!K>bRI\L{BHLO|<>=CLYby}K>LYD)bQ<>@_g
ACP^DFGP9UwI!<>@!DJACP)BN<>D)KuLGm|V!KP9=H<>P9@yd~LAH]_LBHLMP)BHLFGP9@!=H<>b_LBh]_LBNLDURP9@_P)ACP9@Q<jF<Ak[FGP9@QbQ<>AH<P9@P9@
AH]_LP)BN<>LY=}`l]!<>FN]fBHLYr.sQ<BNLY=AH]QDJAqBHLO|<>=H<>@QgiDFGP9URV\P9@_LY@Aq<j@fAH]_LWAH]_LP)BH[fLY<AH]QLBqV\LBNUW<AH=,VQBHP.P)M=uP)B
BHLY=CACBE<>FGAH=oVQBHP.P)M=}I!sQAw@_P)AoI\P)AH]ydQP)BRLGm|D)URVKL)}z<>@DVQBNP)VXP9=N<AH<P9@QD)KxAH]QLP)BH[`l<AH]QP9s_Aw@_Lg9DJAH<>P9@y}
K><ACLBED)K>=FGP9@ACBN<>I!s_ACLu=CP9KLYK[?ACP`DJBNbQ={V!BHLO)LY@AH<j@_gVQBHP.P)M=}|`l]!<>KLFKjD)sQ=CLY={FGP9@fiACBN<I!s_ACLq=HP9KLYK[WACP&`vDJBNb!=
MD)F<>K><AHDJAH<>@QgZAH]QLYU
d~LFD)K>KxDiAH]_LP)BH[f`l<>AH]=NsQFN]D
UWP9@_P)ACP9@Q<>F<A[FGP9@!bQ<AH<P9@5|)EJzQkG}D)=
b_LG@QLYbiIXLYK>P`qd
5P)BHLVQBHLYF<>=CLYK>[)}!`vLbQLG@_LAH]QLwV!DJBE<Ak[
P)MzLYD)FE]FGP9URV\P9@_LY@fiA,<>@D?AH]_LP)BH[D)=,LY<AH]_LBWG)GQ}zYJ}yP)B
 zXH)}D)={MP9K>KP&`l=d

fi"#&JZvXE_E)Jy9JWJZ|NJ&xXt_z"QJjTvCY)_CE|J

NLO)LY@t  |NvCN  EEJGZfizXo_,QJ#E
 ?  w?E{LO)LY@c>P|bQb|o u||Ji,|N9XE_E)jP.b!b>LO)LY@|&2J??E
 fizXN
)|Ex#G
 )JkHENGk)tTT  ERLO)LY@>P|bQb|f i|R|J
h  h#oP|bQb
jLO)LY@|{JZhN  zXN
)|Gx#
 )#kGJCE|JNRLO)LY@7>P|bQb|5 
GJE?|JE#)hJ!kNENG!qkGCJ\G)i|)
XE_E)jLO)LY@c>P|bQb|&JZG)GwXk)JJ!kNEHfiG!kGCJNJJ#!#fi?.)\|J
J#{P.bQb>LO)LY@_vJXiiE  Xz\H
)|Ex#
@ig)LY@_LBND)K}_P|bQbiFGP9URV\P9@_LY@fiAH={V!K>D[AH]_Lq=HD)UWLuBHP9KLq<>@iDg9<O)LY@iAH]_LP)BN[ZD)=tbQPWFK>D)sQ=CLY={<>@i@_Lg9DJAH<>P9@|
MBHLLuAH]_LP)BN<LY=Y}!<>@iAH]QDJAtAH]QL[?P9@QK>[MD)F<>K><AHDJACLqV!BHPfiP)M=P)M"AH]_LqBHP.P)A{VQBHP)V\P9=H<AH<>P9@Z<j@iAH]_LqAH]_LP)BH[)}!`l]Q<>KL
LO)LY@RFGP9URV\P9@_LY@fiAH=V!K>D[qAH]_LBHP9KLvP)MD)@fiACLYFGLYb_LY@fiAK><ACLBND)Kj=}D)=AH]QL[P9@QK[BHLY=CACBN<>FGA=HsQFE]oVQBHP.P)M=dt].sQ=}
BHLO|<>=H<P9@!=yACPP|bQbwFGP9URV\P9@_LY@AH=]QDO)L2AH]QLLG\LYFGA"P)MQ=HVXLYF<jD)K><Y<>@_g{AH]QLAH]_LP)BH[)})`]Q<>KLxBHLO|<>=H<>P9@Q=yACP,LO)LY@
FGP9URV\P9@_LY@fiAH=l]QDO)LAH]_LLGXLYFGAP)M"g)LY@QLBND)K><Y<>@QgRAH]_LqAH]_LP)BH[)dAH]_LP)BH[iAH]QDJAl]!D)=tP9@QK[iFGP9URV\P9@_LY@fiAH=
`l<AH]b_LG@_LYbVDJBN<Ak[)}AH]_LBHLMP)BHL)}`l<>K>K"I\LURP9@QP)ACP9@Q<>FW<>@AH]_L=CLY@Q=HLbQ<>=HFs!=H=CLYbDJI\PO)L)dhLY@QFGLW`vL
b_LG@QL)

fi"#&9)R)#_HJw#"Q#\Nfix#
 G)G)Q>XEJEJ|JX!xi_
|NJE?.ZfizXN|JfJfJY9)
 P)ACL
AH]QDJAR`2LiLGm_FK>sQb_LZVQBN<jUW<AH<O)L?VQBHP)V\P9=H<AH<P9@!=qMBHP9UFGP9@Q=H<>bQLBNDJAH<P9@y}z=H<j@QFGL?P9@!K[AH]_LiV!DJBN<>Ak[P)M
FGP9URV\P9@_LY@fiAH=,AH]QDJA,UDY[<>@5VQBN<j@QF<V!KLI\LBNLO.<>=HLYb<>=,<>URV\P)BHAHD)@fiAdt]!<>=tMD)FGA,<j=]Q<>g9]QK><g9]fiACLYb
I.[hAH]_L
MP9K>KP`<>@_gLGm.ACLY@!=H<P9@
P)M"AH]_Lb_LGX@Q<AH<P9@ZP)MvV!DJBN<A[kbQLG@Q<ACL)|ACPWV!DJAHFE]QDJI!KLAH]_LP)BN<LY=

fi"#&fic|).w9JWJ|NJENlljvQJ#E\N"fi"#
 G)GEJ|JX!x
7.oizXHq|)E9
t]_LuBNLY=CACBN<>FGAH<P9@iACPV!DJBN<A[kb_LGX@Q<ACL,AH]_LP)BN<LY=t<j={=C[.@fiAHD)FGAH<>FJ}BNDJAH]_LBtAH]QD)@=CLYUWD)@fiAH<>FJ}!=H<>@!FGLD)@fi[ZAH]_LG
P)BH[iUWDY[iI\LBHLYbQsQFGLYbiACP?D)@
LYrfis!<OD)K>LY@A{V!DJBE<Ak[fikb_LG@Q<>ACLAH]_LP)BN[)d2t]Q<j=v<j=LYD)=H<>K[Z=CLLY@
I.[?BHLYb!sQF<>@_g


fi{|Qfi&!.fiR{Q&y)Q.Q!
 H_)HhC
i)>	Gff
fiHfi
fi
?ff
>Qfi	fifi)QNXfffififf
H_J\H_)HG)NH!
Z
"\ff
#fi$
%tC&N'#)(j'fi)!Jfi>k*+#_!,-
fiC.0/t12JH_vH3CCfiGfi>ff
C&!Jfi>k#_!,-
fiCH_)(fi3
H54)3ff
fi6Q(fiWJH	fiff
fi7,-
G98l_3
:
_)l$;Gff<\ff
_3
tWH_)HiJHq\3
;.
= > 
_? 8 Q? )5H!JZHQ)H@ !J E fi
%T !J fiA +#Q! ,-
fiC J NQ5 B>C QN Xff fi fiff 
Q {HQ) fi3 Dfi
CN GH5 B> E

FHGJI1KLMI1NPOQ"RSLTK-UVKW?XZYTX[K]\J^_`YTLT^affY?^bcX[_dXZYfecgihjh;klnmpoqdrVst9s"u0vxwy5z;{%|5z(}d~d5*dV}d~+){%|~!1|*!
~[xy5z(}fdrVst}$9y5M|A}[>~d}Z	{xy55-y5}|5)}[ tSp|- u`7
/tfi$H_)H3ffT8fiW3#fi>JC3#Hff)Hff>JHq
#
HQ#ff$?8fi$
%H>3Wx.
 I1NN^Zw&drjst'}$V{x|5zf}[~d5"AdV}[~+!0h`cl1k'n)qdrVst9sHv}$'!y5M|*!&}[~d}Z	}[]|5z&}[C r`7
RLMK;K  tt B\qH_HlH_\3
)3
CGff<\ff
_3
fi r 2
# tt B\qH_C
HQRX 3

 x##>G ff<\ ff_
 3fi
   r o. )CRHQJ tt6 t6itr  o. lT8  r r ) 3
 \B oH_RH_)H
8lfi$N H3> #HffQ# 3 fi
%f H_G ff<\ ff_
 3fi
 <fi
 Hff v2 
#  "\ 3 \B iH_
H_)H
8l fi$N fH3 9Hff_# 3 fi$
%
 H_	G ff<\ ff_
 3fi
 fi
 t #Nff r .%fi
G _# 3 fi$
%:G ff<\ ff_
 3
 fi

t #Hff r  i
 ff
> W 5)4 9fi v!J_# CQ H?) uZ
 !_ < |2 i
 !|  'fi$`H H5B G ?) N3#fi
 r
fiz
5# ff
 ficfi>fi'G ?) H3#fi
 r "\ 3 .xfi	fi> J Q2 5
 !_ < fiC H5B 
G ?) H3#ifi
 r fiz
#
ff
 ifinfifi
G ?) H3#fi
 r ) 3
 .t/ fi$&fffi) 3q H_	#ff> ?8fi
D$fi_
 YJ) )(fi H)_# C	fi
fi
%
!_ < C H5B-fifi -E
RpFn ` rVst&s	
5. t ?&CtM ) 3
Cfi
 r 
 . t ?&CtM x##:fi
 rV 
 . r ) 3
  rc5t6 
 . r "\ 3  r05t 
 . r ) 3
 qdvVr X 3 qdHv _2 H_3h
 H_ 
  2
 .C fi r ) 3
 qdvVr "\ 3 qdvV _2 HQ3h
 H_ (
  2
 .C uHQ 
.

_)!_ < x2 5> 1fi



H_Z) )fi H C5H_%

H_)H5\B ?) Dfffi) 3 H_?HQ)fi 3 r )3


# r "\ 3 H Q?8
fiS

 'cfiff_ N  .t/ JQZ!_ < >  ? *+&//'&2    /n = V  /2 ' *
=
)


 9 /n2
' 9 /n fi Yfi C 3c

 C\B C H5B @
G ?) H3#;2 fi fi

G T) H3= #@fi
\B )HH_3H ZHQ)fi 3.9T
 HQ= Z)HQQ
#;x2 HQZ!_ <>  ? *+&//'&2
   /n V  /2 ' * 9 ) /n2V'  'u & ) /n2x ') z2     fi<_
 )
C H5B> 2fi
G fi fi$6G ?) H3#fi
 r ) 3
 B_ 
G T) H3#fi$
 r "\ 3 .
3

fi1-C-ffffff
J3
6 '
 j
J
j

J
 & x
9

 & 
9


9 x

9 x

&
 ]
6'
 j
J
j

J
 & x
9

 & 
9


9 x

 j
 
  3% " 

&
p
j
   9 '

	 ff
fi 



 !"

 ff
fi#

 $	 &%' 

 

 ! () ff(*+

 

ff0 !#%

! $

.

! $

1"2#3	. #*

45 76

,%- !.

 #) /*

&
p
j
   9 '
C" 
 



	 ff
fi 



 !"

 ff
fi#

 $	 &%' 

 

 ! () ff(*+

 

ff0 !#%

! $

1"2#3


fi: <;0= >0?  @ BAC= : 74

B=EDGF 7H

( !"

: I6JA<K95L;0F :

,%- !.

 #) /*

89. #*

1NM AC=F @ O6B;05PF @ BAC=QCR

S$TVUXWZY\[]^fi]#_`7`baL]#^dceYgfihfijk_mln_o]#_`p`



" ff 
    
 %
ff %  

 
 
3
ff3
 

  

ff%3
 
   ff
  

  


% 
 ff " %3 !



  %
!    ff 
qF @r: 44 76JF : A qs ts
x e;r4 7H : PF @ 	D rD u
6JA r4 : H B= @ B= |D u 4AD

 ff !
3 ff   >



 "3%

% 

 "  %  "  ff  ff
ff%  " H 3 
% 

 

%  


A s @ AnswF @ t6JA r6 B5LF4OA Myx
:vuvu 4 @ n
: -= B5LD : =OD LH Jz1DCK5 u 4FD L
x :Vuv: FQ26BD
Q14 : 4A M 4 A<; LH 744D rH26JA<K95 u BF
74E4A M F @ BAC=QP5LDGF6 @r: {D u CAC= : F @ K4BR %
u CAC= : F @ K4F @ DGF AC5 B=EDGF |; rH B=(= 74F= : 6JF 7HI= B} : 4 : A
M ; r6JF : A r4BR

Q 5LDGF6 @L:
 mQbF @ BAC=Qt5\DGF6 @r: 	D u CAC= : F @ KI~gkpv~1A F @ DGF= B} : 4 74D
: } {F @ BAC=Q x b
: rH : } : HL;rD u
AC5 b6JA<K5gA
mF4yA M F @ F @ BAC=QC~0KDpQ x 6BDC4F : bF @
AM C=KA M F @
AM uvu Ans : |D u CAC= : F @ K346 @ 7KD1?


_mk`7_Z ,E\,
 R 

,

 R %@r:vu
 Dm

(@ AA<4 OD6JA<K95$A

x 

(@ AA<4 OD9= B} : 4 : A {	

 6p

 H\b

* 

H0A 74 0ACF @ A u H?

ln_Gf]#a0lnkY\]E<Yg]^filnkY\]



 

F!



  7 

 

7o 

 R : F @ B= = BF;0= {XAC= 
1 / R

3% 

 
"  " )   
 ( '   D
% 
% 3  ff  

F @ BAC=EQO5LDGF6 @L: D u CAC= : F @ K : 4 `7Y\[]#^ :M s @
B} B=fiF @ yD u CAC= : F @ KF B=EK : LDGF 74 : F : F @ B=#= BF;r= r4
D= B} : 4 : A '4 7o; r6 2s @r: 6 @ = B5LD : =E4- ,E! M AC=  !
~ AC= : F= BF;0= r4 
1 ff D LH E! : 4 0ACF
= B5LD : =ED xLu M AC=  R  @ 4A<; rH 74E4#A M DF @ BAC=Qe5LDGF6 @r: D u CAC= : F @ KH B5 rHL4H : = 76JF u QA 9s @ BF @ B=
6 B=FD : PA M F @ = B} : 4 : A r4 : F(5 B= M AC=EK4(DG= x
: Z?






 3 ff

B

fi(1rnLoi\9(rm\n2ZCrorL

oLo|n\,LpnkgLp\fio7Gk1C1C&BmkdGmGkmqJCog' iGg
Gr qk1PGOJnVCy0BBGe&mJEG1G$JLqPJrCG\ffffqk1GmG
kkmB1r0GL 

 1J-\trBJrC-JnVGiCk

OZ
	fifffi

"!fi#$"%&'"()!*fi+,$"!-.#$-/*'012"!3,*"4$"#5*"*&

#$"67$-89:()!;(-9fi<b=*9>@?BAC!fi@DE>F%G"!fi3'$"ff-9F8B*H"!fiI$"J6K6
AC!fi#$-MLfiDN"!fiPOQ,N$"#5*1

"!fi#$%;RTSU*V$#$'>,*367$=WX?ZYN;"!["!fi#$I!1\DK6]"!fi

,$*"!-^$"#"fffi$E_5`UacbdD>J%4""ff-9"Vfi9>0$"#Q$ef5g"h6i$U-9j(-9fiF kD1
/R*efiC$#$'>,*?mlU(j"!n,$"!-o*eff1\?
p rqs"fffit"]"!fiuP,$)"!-v*Nff1313#$-8g'N6i$jgfifffi]wxRdyzU{)?nbT#|R S >}"!fi
OQ,~$"#5*1"!fi#$"%Ig(-9Qfffi13>F%"!},$)"!-=D1P,#9wrX
R ytz
 {>n"!fi}'"()!'>,u"!fi#$"%
>"*1=$$e/"!fin,*e$#J*Vb?AC!fiw7'ky5m
R )ytzK
 <pr{h*h$"#*$'>,|"*(jR\S@(#
>|>"*fi1V67$"-*e>F%=9Jfffi(j6m#$-8g"">,*C$"#5*"?mA!Fffh  *h>*@?



p }"!'N*6"!fi]#$)-8*'"(1"*I6d43"!fi#$"%I'"(!gfi0,*$"!-*Uff'$F#1
}#<"ff,g,%8>"*467$##$"%4RXDfizNDJ1/WXD5"!fiK,$"!-*E,*}(-9,#Dfi*/"!fiNU"!'
X*Xff'$F#1/]$"#"fffi$8j$"#Jg"9Jfffi(C"!'X$#$XRI6i$WXDF*6Qfif5*""#DF1/_J`Uab
"!fi#$"qU*?
AC!fi|14(#ff,%96T$"Jgfi9ff1"1=(-9,#fih6T"!fi#$"%4'"(!*fi9ff1fi#$e}$"$)*(1
$"#5*"P6xff("*[-8j67$"-"!867(n"!'n*:ff(!:(#"nj*n14(#ff,*UIOQ1P>3$"#5
"#?lUrqE##$D*8"!fiUff$"$*(1/(#D5qK!Nn$)!<67$"qh'$10-9#"!fi51867$1fi##$-/**fi
ff1fi"j1(-9Q,#fi"#?C(#,*,"!fi41OQ"N6emJrpCn1-\CpV67$"-"!fi
$"J66AC!#$"-J?
oLo

Gtk1{B{9oLJp2JpG0)2k1EGt1C&BmkGmGkm

 BG 
 GJ	\<9VJCogGgG\7b GgGL I 9k1tJ JnVGkfi0JkJCt&-<B
EC!0GgJ\ qGVBmJveBGIJGBqmJ0pCP"G\vPC(-G\mp\COGJmB|BG{Gr

\CpmG\v9C
OZnAC!*h"!#$"-67,*,qe1$"(",*%/67$"-AC!fi#$-91="!|$"J6~6AC!fi#$-J?



_fi$XQ'$%F1fiOQ"!#$"!g(1"u*"*,*%](!("1@?dACqN"!fi#$"%}'"()!*fi|,$*"!-8
"!'Ut#$)']I'$%<1fiOtj"!fi#$)Cq*"!Ifffi$$*(1=$#J*'$"}dAC^x|,@#N,?D
kLFn1:XaAClKds1:"|''$*F"4xhk}oJfi#%DEkLfiY|fffi$:oJfi#%DekLF)?
AC!fijAC,*$"!-ffC9$>'>*,*g"*(K!fifffi$*""*(K/1fi(#*1fi|qU!fi#$"|/$#$C"ff()!"!'U,*'#$
$"#5*"4B&(-9fiF'$"$"#$"!'$,g#$$"#5*"01"!fi:,*=$#J*;2
(-9fiF*Xff'$F#14]>e>tIx|,fi#E,?DQkLF)?EdAC

(#8"!Jffd"*,%u>"!fiq

8>jff1=1(-9,*#?
AC!fi}XaAClKd,$"!-Z'"()!fiK"!fi#$Uq"!fifffi#'"3>J%VO$eOt1*fi80"fffi>Q#6X,'6
F(1fi<j,g#$,*u7"!fi9LgpJ<o#1g0mFgK13V"fffi>#K6d,'6(#,*ff97"!fi	k<Jg
"ff()!|"!'~$"#Jg"t"!XqEU(#$TqU*,*,'"ff54(U$"#$@"!X"!fi#$"%N67$\"!fiX$g*fie##?md()!
(-9fiF|*I()!:(r#$}*K$"#5*1(?]AC!]$"#5*"*I#$"67$-91V(-9fi<Nfffi$"
"!'Nx<"!fiU(-9fi<E*d1*"'>,1u67$,g,>$)ff("Cffi-9,18"!'K7>t"!fiU(-9fiF
*}fiu1*"'>,*1:67$}F%(#fffi$"$<",%:($$"(",%(#,g""O1f5-8,?
r

p Dd!rqE##$DX"!'7>tn*

fiKJQsKQ

E'#U""fij"J"V"Vm"fi)*fiu"'C"fij8t<gCfiC*'0iK<
"3fi9"*47tfi"K*""=#*""Qfi9*)I'"ufi##""fi*"
"\]CJ#t"fi9fifig"*n'9FNgxnX"fi9<#8dcUPF
 fi)5r4#BGi)8*#2"r5*fi&"'0"79*/F*kF8+"fi
"J"I"\EC*C*e"]#}=m*\"]9fiF"*I"finFfiFN#j'"
"#5*n#}*j"fiu*~"fi)#d99]*"""fiFmT"#Jg@mC*
)*<K#I*Vn"9Pm"#Jg"C']3"'U"'"gi="]*"=3*
Cfi#J
m8|<<XP0X\uQFdd
	ff
fi

r:5|fiT"'"9FT#~"fid"

5"fi#"K'")*fie7@""! fi#\"fi#)#

P"*|"\TE/"*#N"! #jfi8*P"fi#)|g['"8fi#! "#fi"*\7"!
7"#EQ$!#*4"#9*"H["*fi0"J8"*#'%8&('*),+,+,+*)-&.fi)E&fi#'"#!"!
x**fi"U*/#*KFfiF"#
8r0F"*/10:2

89

|""9KE0}#/1032

465fi 270 8	9

JUfi#"U]"fi#"

TgV*h=7t"9Q'""*id*"F"*'"0~"fiN'9##hm

:=>
5 /1032 89 
;fiCfi9*5*?/&)-@*hu7h*#'fi"fiNxA?4B)DCh*E"\JU*U"fiN7E?/&)-FF
*|fi#! "@4G7j"*#'8#j''n|"fi8fi:E=#*9"Pfi#! 9

xX"g#'hg9Nt5**"~#g<;""ufi|7"#e'9##)X'"e#9

J

 KJ i|4"! )fi#N"fi#"LGU"IFM%8&('*),+,+,+8)-&:.C*N["9FU"fi
GK 	 H 0 I
' ),+,+,+8) J . u"fiN""K'9##)A&(',),+,+,+8)-&.c%8 J ' ),+,+,+*) J . *"=*NLX
J
'*fi
J gU#)9O2 6P665 FQLxfifiL J SRUT|)\"fi#"g J *K#9 >
 2 6P665 FQL
xfifi
L  J VRW]
? )XG  0 Y	5Z	H 0 ff gC8*\[ J )^]1_e"*"*}XI58 J 
8)fi"I"9F`]<aIb,Tc)^?4u
d 7"fi}*"F"*'FU"*#'e8
%  J ' ),+,+,+*) J . )ec<]Rfn
T 
"fing't*4fi9*j*e#9 Y:98figfigPh "#"*j*C*h#9 
6 0 figPh 
Cfii2 IY

h89 9""! fi#"#"'"]*"U#*#"*#'#t"fi]**#*C*I"fi
Ffi<K3#*
]r"*fi#C#J*e/8"! )fi#fi8g="fi#"AGUU*="fin"""@#E
}XQdfitfiC'E""]"#5*"9un8t<Ed/}nQ"#5*"
8"fin"fi#"

j

n"#'fi*#"099fiFe8|u"#5*"09"'C9fiF#dCJhEj#
#J*"/#*"8]<fiF9*#mJ["*9Qfi*#"*fij7"

"fi8"fi#"kU

"'En#"gfi/fi#"gfi9IFfi<N*#)@C"'"*8"fin**#@eE#"
*ErJ9)fiUdE='"fi**[JG"VQ"[""*"jJQ*fi

#"3Vfi! *8"*j"g#'4l4&(',),+,+,+8)-&.593"fi9"*IE0#g
#""*fi}"'El/&'*),+,+,+*)-&:.Xg)fiU7e*t*"F"*'"(&'*),+,+,+*)-&:.t

j

"#"V"""gfi]7"o"nfi#"V9fiFnmN7"oL`Lpqb8md

jfifiN"fi

38H*":"#5*:#*"Hrl/&'$),+,+,+)-&:.fi}FH*fi[:fi#"*"=

#'"n*#)Q7Cfi#*#'is8@',),+,+,+)-@7tk9"fi|5fi8"fij#*fi=*fi

u*v

fiwExy3z	{y:|6}~=}{	wE3qxQy{3z63}:

M^,<#,,:-*<#$3#Z-"4D#,<-,,^3E$h*$^<h^#A^,^74,6-
^3,3-V33#,^,^7*XY^*63^ff^3B3*^#,#	S^#3^*3,B-*B3*BD#
^n#$:^7B^\#7#$n:^*3,B-*nY33^:BM**,,,*-7q\f*(,,,,-:37
 BV8O^,6-K:^*3,B-N  ,,,8- M 3:#K,3-oc^#*
(*,,,8-  -7#4c^-,Eff#,W,3-*E3$3#i^#-,V^3  #
i"D#,M-,,^#$h*$^\V^3eD,6D76,ff-^33^*3,B-3:#,^,6^7
X^*63DS^:Bn^#  #ff#,3^3#*-I$7q^3c37$c3^*3,B-Y
"^#,-S(^,^7-ie,3-`c^3**,,,8-  6^#`-,X(3^^q^B^73Y-e^#
BBD  M*$-  ,,,8- # cc:D^#\#,Uq-*$*#*	M-,Dn-\n-,D*^#iff$
3ff *	^#MD,6D7  BDqN^#M,-M4^,^7-e3^*3,B-M,,,,8-:  
^#e-,cY:-^q^B^73n-(*,,,*-  g`c3K^#  6#N<^#e#,,:-\`^B^":*
-,D*K^#\ffg 3 *	\^#^,^7
 SK^#e3^7^^73(,-^#4#$:#3^,^^,6^7BMN$77#*	Sc^#4-,
(3^^q^B^73<Vc:D^3`$77#*	VV3^  *`-##8X,,*^3BX^#n:D-Y#,
,-	^#n3^  #S-,<h^,6^7e-M$77#*	$73^^^ffh:-^q^B^73ff<^#E=B  
*$-B3*BD#4B\6$77#*	,n63E4^,^7,33  :^*$^^^*-:^  
^#$77#*	\3:633($#:*,(c3DOB^:-^q^B^73A^#BBD  4*$-4B
^#D	,
`-e^:BS-7i<^#4^e$^\D,6D73c$7:^#,^*K^3e-,DB^#^h^3DQD337#
^#D#,ec^3NBBD  *iI	-*$*#*q-,D<B^#e^,^7:\-O3:633ff^#,^
$77#*	^cn3$#*Yn3,N,h#8X,,*  $7:--D3$-*K`$7  3B^73nD,6D73X-
3:633:$7h73*q^Eff^#M^3,^
 	 ffg:fr  8B 3 ff=,,D:=	6:gEEB`YD n
 B g 	4" Y  "	$
 B B      O
 *,A -DB      " X  B  e:6 76h8 "
YD  
  8=gh
	S3^#Y#^7Mff	qD     :   gB^V#$#*^#Y:^7^^73
,-fiOE^*\^3B	M   : =	*8=	ff*De*\3D*3,B-ff,3^X$77#*	
 f:-,r<:-^q^B^73A  c=B  *$-i^#,^$#-^  	   c^3^  3
-,`
`8 X\,#$#^#MD-"D#,E^3,^:B^D3#3^  * n^#M:^7^^73,-
 	ffg `=,,D66:  = = ff "!#$&%('iYDM)	:)*  ,+
- .h60/  21$AY  -q$e  KYD    N*,* - 21$^43q   $ `65
7 0/  (8.5	  1*B  21$   B 65X:9  67 $ eB;  *5(8<; >=@? 5V  A9  43g4B
 $AC<*e^,<9  !#ED)FY
GIHKJML(NOPLRQTSL(QTLUTVXWZY\[)]T^AY_Y `aNbUTLcO<QPUTd\efQTLcg2hiQTjOPNlk:kALcO<QQTSnm4QojAbprq&QTSlL(LfstLceQuj:vmUTLcwxd\OPdyj:bzjAb{m6pyj,ecm:p|d\blO<Q}m4bxQTdymQTdyj:b
d\O&gILfQTLfUTVd\blL)g~gdrUTLcefQTprqtQTSLLfstLfefQ&j4vmUTLcwxd\OPd\jAbjAbm:bLfm4Vlp\L$m:bd\blO<Q}m:b,QTdym4QTd\j:bQTjQTSlLUTj,j4Q)h O>wAmUTdm4lp\L
wiLceQTj:UugLf|LcbngIOakAp\jAlm:p\prqjAbQTSlLO<QPUTNefQTNUTLj4vQTSlLQTSLcj:UPq,H
 HouSlLwAmUTdm4lp\LwiLcefQTj4U(j:vm>efpm4NlOPL6d\OaQTSlL6w:m4UTdym:p\L6wiLcefQTj4U(j:vQTSlLecpym:NlOPL:h ORSlLcmAg2H


fiEoEottt

f42T|K|Kno,|(iff),K>In<4{K
K,|z
 KRiotRi|i$n:|xt)Kn|KK> E& n:KEK|x||uttK|
,|4x,ffiffi,K>Kn&>it,04)cT|4K,>K,|4x,6u & itK4,4nMn4,>K|
0u  6,|,x&|M>>),i)xita  x)4it)n42}KioK)
,|4xE<ixi|i|>K{K|uttK|,|)|
,x0)x)4|in}|
|KKK|xz)4|in,|x)x))4i)x),)tx
a Kx
itK,KM)xit4x))4itto4)cT|4,t|,|4x,IKn
,|x{
x)Ex))4itK,{on4KKK4|xK)EK_
,K,2oI.oR
,|ztM{K:,|,ln4nnKuxn4||)xixx$|)nKuxn4{Mx|
|0n|)xixx,\,|)|(KI4ol.Ro,|4it,)x2TutKK,|
{4,|,),4|a$K,||z$|$ln:n|xi)||z|,
|iff|o|$t{M,|zit,)xutKKz|K|4_TK|uttK|P
00f)4c
	fiff0)
0f
64
0f
6	ff0)
 t{M,|4{K|4_TK|uttK|P
00f)4cc	ff4cc
0f)64cc
0f)64cc	ff4cc
 I >,|,xt{~,||zK|TK|utt|<i|4,|n4|,),4
4||x::
00f)4cc	ff4cc
0f)60)0c
0f)64cc	ff4cc
 l.l,,4o  KlI "!$#
%'&)(+*-,/.102#.43658795:!'&<;>=?&@BAC5:!'& EDGFH5C@4Ffi%'I8IJ!'DG7
0H.4IJ.BAC5C!'&)KGGLNMPORQ"S<04))P587UTULWVXFY%'#Z0'KW.[3$.[&\5 ;]D^._@9!'&`7>5C0H.4#!'&aIb(c0d!'e%'5f&gAfFY.h!'#>5i.>7jDGFH5:@[FYk
l %$#.&.imH%dAC5C!'&n;>#h.1.po:F`.[&@>.rqY%'#>5fAC('V0H.C*s&a5fAX.Zt6K
l %$#.n@9!'eUqIu.4AX.[Iv(xwh!'=Y&0K
l %$#.n!;wh!'=Y&0/.h0y0H.zqAfFdK
l @9!'&aAi%'5f&{&!c!9q`.4&|@4IJ%'=?74.[7}!'#Rq#!9qY!7>5fAC5:!'&`7xoz!'&)Iv(p%'&aAX.1@9.10H.[&aARIv5CAX.[#%'I~7_%'#._!>q`.[&$tKR%'&0
l @9!'&aAi%'5f&{&!&!'&aVCmd#Z!'=Y&0;4%d@6Af7[
B

fiWY)/a?J/|nW)H\N$)?)Ja

PNa1{+ah6$\h`h)4$hB?h`u`ghB)a[hJdfhdh`+X[dnJ4+ah$aJB
{]UzYi'14 dd))dNBd'd9dahu`4h`nnd`$d`WU2[Y)hBhhud\
6$4h`P4$''1u'JBBaz
[

fi ia "yJ}izG 

[ 

f`41}f$P$u-hX_a
$)\f$$Ghz"
_9]{`E[d)1)[]pa'h9)'aJ_h`4$h
C 1Ur$)+$hY4u'B\4U$[`$nauBh)9h)'Uh`j[Y)hB1hJd4$\jh'hZaBxdaJyJ 
uRh4$J1'aJf$rsaa)`4r$/p)u9y$uJr`BJ4hudN
"4]h)1/$]$  h)ahB)u4'_N)d_a'1$n441]'1$uh`n'9u'aJBugNau)
`4''1u'Jj4  Pnh`4$1p$8duu64
fB444Ba

Wf"B4446a"_f"44446a

WfB444Ba
WfB444Ba
Wf  444B  

)f]
6f">yaf>
$f	6yaf
6




faYyafY

WfB444Ba

fffidf
6f">'fa)

fB444Ba
fB444Ba

6f
$f
]f





fffidf
fffidf
fffidf

aH9
fffiHZ69
U$ha'  `{$)\h)'  uU)4d'hJd\8h4$Nu[dnau4BJxd))N)$c`4)h+$?
$)x[d/h$u)rd)Jp$hd))cC$[h4
"4h`p4}$W$B
[dnd`B/h h`c4j$$sh`p$HB[B`B/nuJ41$P\h`4u$aB
ffffidf9^4r P$/14?u1Jdcfa)[hJdy$uJu`n`Bu4hJdy$h`j[dnd`B/hrux
"4+rP4[d)huhhu`]$ d` u'BJB_[`$naur8$^B$1p[dh))[un}/$^fduJ6U4)$^B$9
dhJhJ$[dh) )[^! a 9[da1)[)4d'hJ$nu'BJBx[`$naJ}8$_`4h}h`
a'1$441s  $) '14U "p$) $> N$h`4a'1$n441h#$dh)P$`'UYuu'1u$
f$B$9g`4d'hJ$[d[ )a[  G 9Nn[d)1a[pdhJhJ$_u'BJB+[Y$aJ8$]_
`41]a'1$n441U 'hj4$$)y$u"$h`4ra'1$441}Cua4u))u)jW'hj4r+'
U6 [d)hu`4 h`xa'h9)u`gah$aJB GU&%_  19H41u1hJaJh4YuhJd 
[d)hhG$)BJ4hu`]dnU4$$/B[B`B/^uu41$uG$h`W8$9'fffidfX-8hd 4u$)B( fais
fffidfaX9 {p`6 4u$u ha'}$/\14?u1Jd   )u9gh'huZB]h`[`$naJB}`441`BP

)+*

fi,.-0/21234	567.4	8989:9;

<>=?>@A<>BDCE@AFHG=I<><>@JG9F2KML+FN?POQ?SRUTV9WYXHLZ>L&@JB[?>X[L\Z>L]0@<>@JR9F_^HL+`JL?SL+<P=IFa?SL+bcL+^HL+FN?`A@J?SLZd=I`[efg9hji2kmlnBDZdR9KpoqV
Or=I<><d@JG9F[<si	kt?SR"usv&w.xsV	=IF2^RI?>XHLZ>WY@<SLy=I<><>@AG9F[<Y@J?\?SRQzE{}|t~ExsR9FN]ILZ<SL+`JCIV	=IFaC<>[bX<>=?>@A<>BDCE@AFHG
=I<><>@AG9F[KML+Fa?^HL?SLZdK@AF[L+<=<>=?>@A<>BDCE@AFHGZ>L]E@A<>@JR9FV.XHL+F2bcLr@JB_F[R<>=?>@A<SBjC0@FHGZ>L]0@<>@JR9FLcH@A<S?><V@A<
[F[<d=?>@A<	=2`ALI
 LFHRW<dXHRW?>X[=?=QZ>L]E@A<>@JR9F<>=?>@A<	L+<.=IFLcH=IKM2`JLsk&r@JB=IF[^R9F2`JC@JBP?>XHLMbcRIZ>ZdL+<SR9F[^[@AFHG
?SZdH?>X=I<><>@AG9F[KML+Fa?YBjRIZT<d=?>@A<2L+<}?>XHL_LcE=IKM	`JLI<bcRIZ>Z>L+<SR9F[^[@FHGbcR9F>[F[bc?k.usX[@A<}<>E"bcL+<}?SR
L+<S?>=2`@A<>X?>XHLU?>X[LRIZ>L+KV<>@AF2bcLU=I`A`LcE=IK2`JL+<@AFK_[<S?.L_<d=?>@A<2L+^<>@AK_[`J?>=IFHLR92<>`JCI|L?onL
?>XHLZdL]0@A<>L+^]ILZd<>@JR9FRIBtoqV2WYXHLZ>LO@A<&?>X[Ly<>H2<>?>@J?>H?>@JR9FbcRIZ>Z>L+<>
R9F2^[@AFHG_?SR$?>XHLZdL]0@A<d@JR9F
R9F[<d@A^HLZ&2Zd<>?s=IF=Z>2@J?SZ=Z>C$R9<>@J?>@A]ILbcR9FS2F[bc?s@AFUV
yi	kV[WYXHR9<>LbcRIZ>Z>L+<SR9F[^[@FHGMFHLG9=
?>@J]ILULcE=IKM	`JLy  =I<d<>@JG9F[<YL+=IbdXi k =IF2^?SR"EV	=IF2^=I`A`RI?>X[LZ}2=Z=IKML?SLZd<s?SR\usXHLR9F[`AC"W&=+C
BjRIZy?>XHLLcH=IKM2`AL$FHRI??SR
LbcR]ILZ>L+^aCo  @<BDRIZy?SR
L2FH[Z>R]=2`ALMBDRIZy@AFo  "usX[@<b=IF
R9F[`JC_L\?>XHLYb=I<SL.@JB=?`JL+=I<S?(R9FHLsRIB?>XHLY`A@A?SLZd=I`A<(kahNlP@A<q2FH[Z>R]=2`ALIV9=IF[^$XHL+F2bcLs?>XHLY=IFa?SL+bcL+^HL+Fa?
`A@J?SLZ=I`?SRM?>XHLybcRIZ>Z>L+<>
R9F2^[@AFHGb`A=I[<SL@Fo  @A<\[FHZ>L]E@A<SL+^QBjZ>R9Ko(qusX[@A<&@A<\?>X[Lb=I<SLLcH=Ibc?>`JCWYXHL+F
Or<>=?>@<2L+<YE
~E@AK$@A`A=Zd`JCIV+bcR9F2<>@A^HLZ?>X[L(FHLG9=?>@J]ILbcR9FS2F[bc?  i2kVWY@J?>XbcRIZdZ>L+<SR9F[^[@AF[GR9<>@A?>@J]ILPLcE=IK2`JL
=I<><d@JG9F[@AFHGUL+=IbdXi	k.?SREV[=IF2^Q=I``2RI?>XHLZ\	=Zd=IKML?SLZd<h@AF2b`A[^[@AF[Gl(?SR(usXHL.R9F[`JC$W=C$BjRIZs
?SRQ
L_bcR]ILZ>L+^0Co  @<Y@JB@A<s2Z>R]IL+^BjRIZ.$V	WYX2@AbdXb=IFR9F2`JCR0bbHZ@JBP<SR9KMLkahNls@A<Y[Z>R]IL+^V
=IF[^XHL+F[bcLU?>XHL_=IFa?SL+bcL+^HL+Fa?`A@J?SLZd=I`n?SR"?>X[LUbcRIZ>Z>L+<>
R9F2^[@AFHG$b`=I[<SLUX2=I<YLL+FZ>L]0@<SL+^YusX2@A<s@A<}?>XHL
b=I<SLLcH=Ibc?>`JCWYX[L+FO<>=?>@A<2L+<.  

 Lc0?&WL<dXHRW?>X[=?\@JBWL.^[Z>RI?>XHL}ZdL+<S?SZd@Abc?>@JR9F"R9FFHR9FE!GIZ>R92F[^$B=Ibc?><hjILL2@AF[G=I``2RI?>XHLZ&Z>L+<>?SZd@Ab
>? @JR9F[<lV[z{Pu}\@<sX[=Zd^L]IL+FBDRIZY0[=I<>@J![Z>RIR9<>@J?>@JR9F2=I`2?>XHLRIZ@JL+<
_n020S}Dd	0Q[an$[0>SD$E	+jPjaNcAc
Htt& hoqd  >_l DY.&0S& [QHNUjEdcytNc0
 IS_!N92SHc	EjSNq2jm
 ISMS>E	a>N
j9
 2!j	HJ0cU	SEjH [Q2mddNc2&mcS S	Hc
&

 ISfiff+[j
HI	\E		Amc>E	

   RI?SL?>X[=?YXHLZdLWLLcE2`A@b@J?>`JC$=I`A`ARW jB RIZYFHR9FE!GIZdR9[F[^B=Ibc?><  LU[Z>R]ILy?>XHL?>XHLRIZ>L+KV2=I<
=R]ILIVH0C"<>X[RWY@AF[G_=_Z>L+^[2bc?>@JR9F$BjZ>R9K  
u   xP ~E{Puph=Z>LC "!IR9X[F2<SR9FV$#&%#9lu=IL=I<

G9@J]IL+F=$KMR9FHRI?SR9FHL_ zLcE[Z>L+<><d@JR9FR]ILZ}?>X[Ly<SL?sRIB]=Z@A=2`JL+<YT(+' i	k*)
24
 ,+ h- k  l10 +3U
2 h-_
4 65 l
k /.
24
hjWYXHLZdLUBjRIZ=I`A`8>7 *9 k  T =IF[^BjRIZ=I``6
: <; V15 Tl  LFHRWpbcR9F[<S?SZd[bc?=Q2=?>bX[=2`JL?>XHLRIZ>C
= oqd>&=IF[^=I<><>R0b@A=.?SL+^<SL?sRIBtLcH=IKM2`JL+<s <>[bX?>X[=?.b=IFL<>=?>@A<2L+^R9F[`JC@JBo@A<\Z>L	=I@JZd=2`JL
BjRIZsqV2[F2^HLZs=IFNCQZ>L]E@A<>@JR9FB[F[bc?>@AR9F  WYX[@bdX=I`A`JRWY<s^HL+`AL?>@JR9F

?A@

fiBDCFEHGJIKELNM3OPMQIJRTSVUfiBDWHXYSVCKR[Z\E
IHGNWHM3]^
_1`baca<dH`efJf
acf
gihkjl`a<dH`me<`$nHopbqar`/sut\vwdHf&xr`umqeq
yfi`bar`bexcqe`/q
zz{a<d|`fi}Pqeoqjz3`$x~o/t\mzHx~q
|`bv}qeoqjVz3`~_`bawhjl`qfia<d|`bf
eq
xwgf&zzfAvwxb
s/bbbKrVr~

D1$bbbKrrc1$bbb$rr~

D1$bbbKrVr~
D1$bbbKrVr~
D1$bbbKrVr~

l
$bbbArVr~
K1bbbbKrrc\NA1$bbbArVrc
c&1bbbbKrrc\

1$bbbArVrc

D1$bbbKrVr~



bbbKrVr~
  bbbKr  r~

~$bbb$rr~l
l1bbbbArVrc

A1$bbbKrVr~
c
1$bbbKrVr~
cV1$bbbKrVr~



~K$1$bbbKrrc
    bbbKr  rc[bb    bbbAr  r~
~K
$$bbb$rr~
~KA$bbb$rr~
~K$1bbbbKrrc

l|$Fr
rVbbbArr~
lY$<FrV
bbbArr~

l&11bbArJ\<Frc
l&1$bbbKrJ\rV<Y

~PArV
rPbbbArVr~
~P$
1$$rbbbArVr~

~PbV1bbArJ\b$r~
~Pb$bbb$rJ\$rV$A

f
ar`a<dHqafi hiJ(Dvwd|`be<`oxa<d|`NHyj`bewf
gzo3ar`beq
zxDotq
Hna<dqahoxw|`b&qa<of&ge<`b`
t
oxDNHq
x<oQme<f
mlf&x<o3a<o3f&Hq
zd|`$p`pf&yfimz3`bar`$z3Jjlf&HHnVt|q
HndHq
xq/n|`bma<d f
g6N
_1`baa<d|`xr`baf
gDf
ml`$pf&yfimlf&|`$Ja<xjl`/a<d|`xr`baf
gwq
zza<d|`q
Yar`$p`$n|`$Jafizo3ar`beq
zxarf[a<d|`pbzq
xr`$x
~r1$bbbArr~c~P<1bbbbArVr~_1`bajl`/q
J[e`b}Noxo3f&gHpa<o3f&q
zz3fKvwo|nH`$z3`ba<o3f&
f
g6a<d|`pf&yfimlf&|`$Ja<xwoc
_1`bajl`qxr`baipf&Hx<ox<a<o|cf
glf&|`wzqjl`$z3`$nu`|q
yfimz`gf
e`$q
pdpf&P<HHpaofitJq
xgf&zz3fAvxb{Hf
e`$q
pd
mlf&x<o3a<o3}
`pf&P<HHpa~N  tlvi`pf&xrareHpa~qH`b&qa<o3}
`fizqjl`$z3`$n`|q
yfimz3`gf
e~sutlvwd|`be<`a<d|`
mqeq
y/`bar`bex   q
Hn"qe`xr`baarfq
Hnq
zz\f
a<d|`bemqeq
yfi`bar`bexa<q
`f&a<dH`}Pq
z|`Foy/ozqez
t
gf
e`$q
pd|`b&qa<o3}
`/pf&rHpacifiK6A  t\vi`fipf&Hxrarepaqmlf&x<o3a<o3}
`uzqjl`$z3`$n`Fq
y/mz3`gf
ecsut
vwd|`be`cmqeq
yfi`bar`bex$  qe<`xr`bawarf/q
Hn q
zz1f
a<d|`bemqeq
y/`bar`bexopbzHnHoH~Dqe<`xr`baarf
 qe<&yfi`$Yaoxrf&y/f
e<mdHoparfa<dHqa&o3}
`$oa<d|`me<fJf
gcf
gd|`bf
e<`$y&o3}
`$xa<dHqapbq
jl`
x<qa<oxr`$nf&Hz3o3g86  uhcrr{woxDxrf&z3}qjz3`
t\$thwoxe<`bmq
o3eqjVz3`~gf
e

f
ar`ca<dHqaDa<d|`cpf&Hxrarepa<o3f&Hxi&o3}
`$ qjlfA}
`pbq
jl`~yfifNnoQ`$n`$q
x<oz3/arfue<`bmVzq
p`~a<d|`~e<`$xrareopa<of&f
g
jlf&HHn|`$na<d|`bf
enH`bmHa<dvwo3a<d qfie`$xrareopa<o3f&f
g8jlf&HHnH`$na<dH`bf
e<vwon|a<d\
&

fiNVV&&&
\iPH
A

	fiff !ff"	$#%&'(#) *$ff+,ff.-/1032547698;:;<= ff'>!ff *?+<	*$	' ff'"!ff *@BA
	C:	!ff"	EDF"G"	Hff'+<!ff+,IKJ"< 	L:5#%.< JMC ff'>!ffGff=J"+<N<:5ff<E O!	>* *
Eff+,ffPQ"	=+<**"ff	RffOI1 "	SG	S+,ff	AT:U<PV<:IQK	* **ffWP+<	*#Xff.+<J"JY<1 	=!ZG1,A
	 	Hff5+<	Hff ! * 	Hff[J"ff'+<J>Pff<'" X ff\8+]D5!	Hff+<"	^	_		ATS<	*.:;+<!ffa`  8;I1Db+,\cd+<BA
<1"ff	+<Jfe7g\	(#hi#jffK+,ffk-/10325476h#5ff.J+<J"JMR	' ff'"!ff *.d>	5"bff'+<!ff+,IVJ
:;<)V+,'fflMHAl*!mV	KffXff<E ):U<)#X"E ` in 8+]D)+<	K*o8;IQDpJ"*WPH< 	_#Xffff%ff5<ff7 ff'"A
ff	 e
0kO"	qff<1"ff	+<J)+<<P7#%=*'<rffs&#X 	Cff+<J"td"	Su+,I1ffO-/10325476v	*\J"d+<J"J"M
	' ff'"!ff *R""	R:;	K!ff	e

Fnxw ` y wdz|{L}~5yb ` iwNAPH
KEox,

E,U_dK!(lR!i>,\V f,E
Y[7W 8'aD !<k,;,]K;lR ,E;"VE,E,Q,;,TO3;oV.V,K
,V ;
U!,y];UN,,V,\f,U  x,V=  B

2 >ff< Z>3+<!ff+<J"JMGcdff#) +,tVPd"	!ffX ff'"!ff"	+<J"Ji#L+[ffE+<S]ff:;<#7+,'*G *K!ff	
b
ffOff<1ff	K+<JV+<<e
  `Y`K  2b *K!ff	ffN/%/10325476"b+<:;J"Ji#Xe
 I13ff3K<1ff	+<Jyff<'M5<Iff+<>	 *:;Z?OIdMkKJ"+<"	S) +<EJ""ff'+<J<N8;W iKD
C ffaO
IdMRff<1"ff	   e
 !	'"ff<:ff[!ZG1	 	Hffb<:&
 #XK"'!<' 1	*ffOff[!ZOQ	 	]ff5"	=ae
C ffo$
 I1off#XK"'@!< 1	*@ffJ""ff'+<J":U<:+<!ff
C ffffu'"ZNff<.K<1ff	N<: h
K *"+,ff b>	e
 -<a+<	HM.J"+,I1 J *.!+<ZOKJ_NlEPQJ"ff5ffF!< 1	*K"	SO'<Q'ff	+<JYJ"+,I1 J *.!+<ZOKJ<P
  T PWI1GEuff+,ff
 >+Rff'ff+<"S	ZG 	Hffkff.ffG'"ZNff<K<1ff	k<:O
 E


 8   D3fi:V+<	*N	JMF:Q8 ( D3"3+S<	K*G:;+<!ff)"	GPd+<	* W fie
ffK+,ffp:;< +<'   P R
0kJ"PH:U<%+<	]M\ff<:1J"+,I1 J *\!+<ZGKJ 3pP]Jffo=
 I1ffb!<' 1	*"	Skffp<:QK<1ff	+<J
J>+,IQ J" *R!+<ZGVJ e
 #5ff.*>+,IKJ""	SOff^
 P
 - <[+N'<Q'ff	+<JY'K+<  	^K<1ff	+<Jx!ZG1	 	]ff 
  C
ffO!< 1	*>	SOmKEff
AT<'*a"	  	omK'ff
AT<E*!ZG1	 	]ff O "*!mV	 *u+<
ff["	_#Xff.*"+,IKJ>"	SffX.e
   l ff+,ffJ< 7/%/Q032k476F8 p  a
   DM J"*
ff%ff 	:;J"J(#5pff+,ff7+<	HM cd 	!k<:W"	K 
+N!<' 1	*"	S\ cH 	K!<:3"	K7    #5"'.J< k-/1032546F8p'aDEeX^<(<(P
  3 Dbff 			\!>ffk:U<[-/10325476\8'aDEe
:p	_1"ff<FJ"ff	^!>ffa:U<[/%/10325476\8   a


\=;$]

( `Q

65(#$*F%' Jff%"	OmV'ff
AT<'*% J"+,ffkff\ffX'<Q'ff	+<J+<i=
	ff5K<1ff	+<JK+<<P
#)X+ #@ff+,ffp' 	Hffp!	*"ff	:;<pff'+<!ff+,IK>J"fflMF<:Yff<M\K+,ffE"	S#%F8+]Dff+,ff%ffbff<M
i

fiHiKdyBHVG]VioY<dK

1=K,'"lHl!V<7<;1\,O.	ff
!r1fi'
! r=K
<'


 < ) < 
 %
 O,
 
  ' 
!   
  !
'"
 ) $ #<%
 
&Ku<K"'
'
 ' 
! ' d' ff b".K( <)
 *  
  ,+b X b1 
 ffN  
 
 
&*G)
  H
" K 
 <' ff q/ .Q 
!( N="ff <]", ff
 %50
 
&*O1
  ] 23-,,'",4
 5
 <
!6 <_<r d 
 <K 
!( o/ .Q 
!F& 7 O!

  9
 8	:	;:>"!
 <]>, ff
 <7O( =< 23,,'",4
  <
!6 < >"
  
!
<"  ?
&K ff @<E 
!,K " [ G)
 * F,)
 <AFB
  ff
!( B
 ) <F G!
 > 
( 

&ff
 "( C
   '<,
 ' ' 
!  (D
& Y X 
E
 
<=1E
 O<[& 7!
 " 
"7 FG*,
 fi@Kff
!0IJoN<0KC,LNM/OQPGRSOQTUM/VXWLM/Y@ZLNVX[rI<\KC,%ff
'^,]'< 
<"<1 "
"ff%< 
,-
&*G) H["^KL<K<]o_B.	`a"H<(E;(b?cd,e1f;&g<h <
i kdj@&7j(Xj
'k
<?',!ul
&*G) HG<.<fi&7G4"mhn5*
 ',!
 "" 'RJ
 
&*G)
  H @<\<]&& 7 G!
 "" i o+b  
& l
 <   Q
 G<\"ff
 <ff
 
!<3_ B
p .1 Hb& 7 G!
  b$ '<' ^ Y
 ,,'",4
  b,1 ,'"ff
 'O,Xq
 
&*O1
  ]4
 <5 3G'  
,
,1 ,  -<NK<l
 ff 
!R" <  
E j G
 X"&. .Q Hq
 ,,'",4
  <
!6 < r
 6^,
[K  
,q
 
<K <X1  
 @<,
 [& 7 O!
 
 X" *b/ .1 
!" '<X& 7 G!
  Ask " '
 ff"fi
  ' 
! o  ff <O$ #< [G( <!
 " E 
!,!
  @<K,' ]l!QF <' 
 "ff
 
!
\& .1 
!E
 %_  o
 O ^1F ,, ^
 
 ^,aJ
 > '*t
 
&*G)
  ]
 5 *5 uXK'" '

&ff
 >', J
 v<b)
 *('!
 k  ff
 ,,
 <w
 
&*G)
  H( 
H

xry>z5{|~}_9${U|9

[WK,1U)%<)<<Q  6*G)
!(,[<Kq6*GB(5
" ]U
&KffUG<9(*
(F
 < '!
 ,K> l"b
 <
 &K,(
E"'\RK<RX!<(  _(<!nb<
  ^"\<'  'f X
 "*
 X' '!
 "ff'*
 <@=
ff5
 6
 <]^K,
!" ,k'<'ff<+bt
! H'
<  >^< .K,(E
 "
' k
 ,E%
 G1 
' ^ 
 Yv8:@;": YK,a<Hu
 T'!
 ,4 G!
   ff F !( 'K<',Kj" l^b
 _'(ff "ff=
' <
 
 >ff!
 N1 
'   
 !q%ff 
ff" q* E ,!" fiO
 (
> ( BK .&
7 O
 ! 
 Yt<
# ^6_
 <
 .K,(E
 "
' a
 O
 ""ffO
' &
7 O
 ! 
 ,Kj" l
 J !
 [9O
 K(<
 ! C d<
 V,('
 "ffO
' <O
 >"'t ,K> l<,)* ,
 
 "j \uX
O
 y  H
 5<
'  'f aK,('
 K"F
' (<
 !  7
 ,'WH!
 9)
 <E@*
 ,<
 
K,(E
 "R
' k
 '!
 ,! Gp
 G"!
 X<
 ^j5
 V,'lHl!VK_8:@;": C
 <
 6
 
 X
 o 1!
 k6
  Q[<C'd'  ffF
 ,ff 
  E!
  $8	:	;>: p<H<
 1 
&*G
 )
  HC

 <r1_j ,!  
@<
 k<o,KE, w
 >!
 b&
7 G
 !" E ,\<
 < )
 \<t NX
 ^ff
 %(*
 Dp
 
< G'd'  CG
 
 

 <1,'
 
(<
#  Rd-<'; d"ff
' ,B!
 '<"CY
 5 
 ffp
 p1(@<
 C
,[1 ' 
.<fiNXrN 6Vg$d;OHH)<'%<<",!">;(* =>!F<X
Er

&
 ff j  ]qX
 uC'< &'<"K"'R&7O!W4E%<_<q
&ff> Nu=" 
a
 =HH)<
  jt<
 <" Y)"r-]
&X<('< ff
!o66*O=,('<5
&!
!^	(<b"C
 B<
 ($
# @
 " "<Hw/H
  G%9<
 rff<
 "u
' ,GJ<
&
 
 
 H,   ,'K"'fi; 'G
ff" l  E!
  'd'  ff vX
 j'
 %
 <0 5
 qj ff @ff9@<
 F !(
 '"ff.
' ,\K,(E
 "u
' 
'!
 ,!" <"  <ff
 6\
 p5
! lG"5  ,',Kj" l<X "ff!
 55HH)<
 ' ~ V!
 kp
  5<" ,(<
' 
 
!
 >uN! oK
  'j!
  "

  <C  ljG
  ff 
 l)
 N]d)<
  q K!
 5N
  u1N
" ,(<' 
 [6<
 
 Xff
 1D
 1* ! k&
7 G
 ! 
 ff' "ff!
  ,
 ff 5K
  'j!
  Rdj 
 ff
,<
&*G
 )
  Hv' ,3
 ,K"',q (vV
 &
7 O
 ! 3
 ,,r
&*G
 )
  Hb
+ X!
 Au=
  
  
X,D
&
 K
 ff)
 ,au=
  5G<
 D
&
 X<(<
'  ff!
 
 <
 K,('
 >\
' 6\
 F,(<
' <
 NN
 <"ff
<1 


fi]=!!94\]4***

"*~!\_!rU!S!
"FB*ff-D6(ff%SjB*fft(,*X-*ff(B@r(r&*-?(~*
 (*ffDff$G(,v(ff    F,!0ff    (NF($(9" 9*ffj06C6C(ff
,jffCXB$6q@,,&*CC?(,*fi$jF$@Dv(ff    
ffaff*!9!


 9 v  \@v]r],$r~9a/XfiA]Fq  (ff("((*l(=660>a
DaDpX@5! !$w)r$fi@=*p(*&9$]!_GX&4r!/&_&%  ff6$
A1wE, \X* qa/X	6ffffj((S(ff
4-X06
&$ 
 	$	

fiGfi

ff

],$BrFa*4_&*	$U(,ffG$ ]4"!ff	$$#(*	JA6(*%$tt@X&B'
1a(
 ?&?  CE~((ffU*ff*fi)
 fiw+
 *r(1
$(4!q!)*ff!6*%11a.-$*0/$w!_04-!	%?21G@	$r
A*  X5
 fi,6
 *r(1
,

7E

! 43(C\ff

ff N3!C$=(  Xa/X=A6_E=*<ff**ff*CE(
8"
 ! 
 $Q69
 ]&	 :9; 4!_&@ X4<, $6&?	$U(=?>@"A.B=

C

66*!%aED@XCGF&4H	$4'IJ$($45Aw4@$@=/t@KU($ $FffNj 	ff
93%ff((jffw!(ff   ff((
C

66*%v\X*q9a/X0F(^(ff
1-Xq&*ML4ff0!X(jCff"  
C(=!N
 ]&	 :9; 1!_&@p=&4 &P
 O.OQ *

,jff$!?]Xm\X*ffX1aR3Q6vr(ff(t(=j(*a5A6NRS*@%! UTfiVN=
0W
 *&XG1<
 #X $ ff@X
6($r$B6(**Yfiw3B=aZ*Xoff(j66$6E$ffjDff(]=**[*?G)
#X
 $ ff@X\
 .$Q(
 =Z?>4?
 -"=
rXr1aB/X 

(((w$ff"L!]/$t^!ff	_	$qa<@`/"4a5(Z/>4&2=

"bL) ! ff(ffff]Ua/X  ((&(&*c
4ff&C=)@D((ff%*j)($
a\A6Pd"!&@>! JTfi$_V$fi4"!ff	e9#U(A6(*%$tt@X ff 4Z_>?.A.=
kff66*rQvq9BjGE C ~ UF~FaBZ*U$ffff  X=9ff(&  (*ff@
	ffff&(*ffDff 
4ff(*ffff  Bff  (&X(a A6fg	$$0/$&(&4 \
< 	 :9Q $14_&@ X4fffi(*7	Cff
"*ffjhraCF(j5$(*ffQ(qalA6iS*@\! <Tfi$_V=$l[*?G)
#X
 $ ff@X
"(L)19a/Xj/$1)kdU$ `*		$l$4nm 4"oD(XFbG$ffn7XB  ffC9L
j(]ff(X5
 fiw(ff!
p(q

firksct4uwvxt5y@z|{zHvw}W~`rk42~sx}tv4u@4z|5

&X(Qh	%(._M\|9bXbXff((2b%9(J"(bRGG;UR_RJ"""_ff0P


b_4n4XG(Xb

x

fi	
fffi 	


	"!$#&%'((#)*',+(.-'/0

=>@?BA&C@DFEG?IHJKAML

1234$56'7',8(92:;3
!5$<8(#

H2>ONQP&RSH2>OC

TIUFVIWIXYXIZ\[^]`aF
_ b XFc b WIXId
sutvw2wxIwy{zFw}|$~\j2Gsut2t,

ef\ghgjilkKm\njomp&fYo qrf

zF7"GxxwB22
 .2h2vh \2

6}I
"Q$u$@.hjG$$G$GO}O2\6u
}

h



,Gh}FII  {&2u2$$  {@"  F  }$



h

B

h"OjI.`Bh@$hFu2hIu$

}Oj`G  6u&`  @u7hh$$Q  h
BFh},$$u"huu7B7j}IIh
"h`h{}hj&hO@u}}h62G`u2}@  }
$h@@2}G"@7jhK7,@{$$`  2
Ihh,h  6O@"}76}QI$Yuh}$$$
 "  {  }Oh$h"O{h2O}Y  {`
}6{$$@{7h6OuYY${  $h"O$hFOG
BhO7j$6}Q$  \
F} $&6 


	 u2fiff  \u
 h\ff"uh@7 u  	 \u

\7 	   \\\h\ 	 \h@h 	 u
 u 	 ^
 
\\h*^7Q\\*QhhQ2\O 	 ^j
  h2I
 
h  "!$#%&KK7hG{h 	 u&h\ @
' {@\h
Kh)(@`hY7\u  	 2OhhQ \
 h\
Qu 	 uK*'u.{27u Qh
 
ff 	 \\h, 	 u`^
 G
 @\h ^h,+ G
 \h 
h\\^`K\ 	 .uS{2hh
 ` u.@-@
' K\G
*h \Y`2u 	 2^
 @\\h\hK\ 	 u\
'OOhGh\O)j
 h7 	 u&\^@\h@\\.
\j2\\\\.u\7{

/

Z$0



U 
U XF[8:9K`  hu.2\`O\\ h@7h
b 13254 0 476 W 64 F
 h
 Y\ <;uu\=;h@\{ ``u.>9uu``u.^\hK*2

	 h^`u 	 KjhO\\@. h 	 u7`
.h7\ .Kh2hG:
? @ h``
 	 uu\hFu\G`
u`@@\h,`

@
ACB 4 ZXDB 1FE W 4 XG8:HI`\  h "` 	 \\  2
uu 	   \uJIGuu \. 
h
; {`\u 2h

 '((7#Yfi\fiL5	F	5NMG7	 OI	2ff4$	 P3
!RQfi

h!2uTS5,Q
K

fiUWfV XYZ$X[Y]\

^_`abdcde_b>fhgji,kl,m5gniporqtsvuwxDyzj{}|R~)R,)){}~)&wuR,}{
 ),*i,kvl vqTsuwxyzj{|R~)R)), {T
 {|suwxyzj{}|]  ),
_b^bd
, {R>7i,kppvq  ),,
 {  ),&
 zj  {}|
 `d_Wsuwxyzj{  {}|}
 {}|  {}|}rsuwxyzj{
 W p}grq , {RR~)svuwxDyzj{G   p}qTsvuwxyzj{
 {  ,W  {  )&suwxyzj{
bb
 zj  {}|$  zj  {}|}rsuwxyzj{
 &  {  ),  &wudR,}{
bd    `d_
 {}|}i,kDq  {|)~  zj  {}|}
 ,&  ),&  {  ),

e   {  ),&
_bdde_dvq , {RR
$u\  .5'@O\h@\jhu.2\
BB aFb W]B 1E W 4 X 
8 ffl^\h^*u\h`@\h@ hhh
\\)
    \h9 \7\ u 	 uG\u`u6\h$7 	 u
`\@ 	 \
 {} 	 `@,?7u
ff\\&u\`,+uu\\\h 	 @\h@\ 	 u
h`@d
  	 )
 {Khu.2\`
 2h$7K`K\\
G\h2,{u&,
    T
 \h
;  p ;@
 
 
; (  
 {$u{2\h@@\h@^{`u{22 	 u
 {  \
hu\`{2\ 	 u\)
 \2,u\`\u "{   
7  @
'  	 F
 G`@&.u"!$R}"fi T!]#% "!pF
  \\^2\h{
 
 	 h`\h7hu\`h\\\  @h
\h
`hh@`un
? \,
 ^\ 	 u7 	 @\ju7h
u7 	 u
\nF
 7hu@ 	 O\h{@\h@\u\.O7Q2WB
? \h
u.7u  
  `GO\
 {\Gu; ^@2 	 O\uh\
 u
 @
\GK\.u  	 @\h@Q 6GBh&u`@\`\Gu{
; 2\h$h@6h
@\h@O\G\Kh 	 u$`\uh $
 .$ 	 2&Gu{
; \
 K\
 u
\*  QT\
 
; (        
Y RvF

r

  6 

\jh\h<;u@
O@h{\

hOuh7

	 ff  \u.{hu\*K

7h\u\.^\ Qhh \`\u

ff  `\,GQ \7uK 	 huK\@&I& 
"{  &$
 u\  h@{2^\h@\h@  u\  {\\
{ \\G`\h\\&uff  "{  >"ff G2G^;O\u

\u



	

fi Y\qp$X[\i\q

i7Y\rr{i7Y]

	 2Q7(!$"T7 	 uOhF 	-5 r)'@O
)
   u\&'@{u.7u
	
^.h \
 `h 7 n
? \
  	 uM2{`
h\\@\h
 	 u
 ` uff u.\O7; )(  	 2^7h 
 \
 2$\`7

  
! r< .$K,
 `\ \Q*$ 	 
  2\h$
\{h\\{@2hQ76@huNff 	 @u\`\ .h
  	 \
 
{7 Q
 @u.^ 	  O h^75
' h
; {\{\ Kh
\
  O72&B
?  	  hu
 {\
 {\ K\
 Ohh\*7
)
# <  .
	ff	fffiffI`{
 K\  \
 O@K*\
 7\hG7@
'
G@ \
 O
 @h7
{  \h6\h@K. 	 u-ff  `h
; &
 {h7n\
? 
hu\.u`5
 
 
 @\h@\h@K},+ u&{ O7

 { u 	 uh^2\
 u\`^ 	 u\\\@
Kh\``7h
 hu 	 u@\h@ {u\$
 jG
 B
  \ Y 	
`h<
;  	 7Q\h7\ hG\       I
 
K^2u{\@\h@@ff   h
 uO\hQ u\\h{
\\u\ h\\ 	 `\,u
 d^
  @
' \G
h
 2 	 `\u 
  K %%M
 \uh
 K@\j@h
\ 	 u
u`
   O=ff  Y
 `\ 	 u^\u `@h
u\Gu
 27`\u\h\
{
 \`h&u
 \ 	    h77^  B
 {
  `` 
 7 	 @\j``  ]n{
 ^h\ "ff G\nF
 
 uu\h\u* 	 uWff  "{  7
 h
	 u@\h@=
@}u.
`




u@2u2

\;h


h\73'@


h

7

;h

 \\u

h\ 	 
 

h\ u `\h`@;hG\7\u

 h    

 ff"6\Kh&h
\\

 ff"Ou* 	

	

\ 

	  	 `hn?\G7Q6@\h \\\.
 ^\h

 Gu^ 	 GG7hu

u.^h6\Qu.

h7n?$

	 `\\.O\hO 	 \.

uh@h\7hO\7

  ]j \`7\Kp;h@\j$Bhh@^* 	

u

`^\@

	

@\jKO*@.

@\h@^Ku\u{ 	5 ]n6h7 	 \u
I `Gu
;  Q 
	  !$%-)#!&7"d%#T!$*%,)  \
' )
 u   !]")np!$'! &<%dT%!
! (-d"
 H @
  h   *) ]
   
 \h.2\\h)( `6*u6 	 \2O\u\. 	 uFO*{7
`{``u\`5
' uG.G\h@7\\K\h@
 
 
h@G6
  {\7K7u`{ 	 O`u.O\\uh@7u  

+,.-/103254768295:";=<>2?:@A;CBD54307EF07@G47HI<GDJ;CEF03KLHNM?:POQ@GM107<AE=6<R;S<GM*:8/5479UTV;WM*682*9"47;=9JXT1/*@AOY;Z@GM10325[07@A\]6P[^;=<A<R;F2?<R;]@GM?6@
OY68H,


fiUWfV XYZ$X[Y]\

Tree Learning and Windowing

Rule Learning and Windowing

Seconds

Seconds
C4.5
C4.5 -t 1

1.50

28.00

1.40

26.00

1.30

24.00

1.20

22.00

1.10
1.00

20.00

0.90

18.00

0.80

16.00

0.70

14.00

0.60

12.00

0.50

10.00

0.40

8.00

0.30

6.00

0.20

4.00

0.10

2.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

2.00

4.00

6.00

Train Exs x 103
8.00

$u\_.WIG 	 u\h@@`\u
dp}%%\uh


fhF,jiK$k
e$ g

lnmGo


/

DOS
DOS + Win

30.00

U

64qp W 64 X.r



  6 

0.00

2.00

4.00

Train Exs x 103
8.00

6.00

U`*a]bCc





@tsFW0QuwvZ

'@G`)j u 	 Iu\I2\K 	 u@\ 	 \\`YK{G$u\.{@\j
@\u

^h\

@\h@@hu\



72

	 xp}%% \uh'@\uhuh  _,Q\7y_J_\Q*
h2\ @
' {hd;`@`\`\h\G\7uuK\Q`\.uu$\_
h@@2O@ 	 
 *`
'  	 \2j^\`\\

 u,
 `\nF
 2h^7(  	 ]j

 ph
; @{\ 	 Q\7`&
   ]n
 
 ph
; @\ { 	 \h@"\}
7zJ|{   
 7j
? \jF
 \u
 K
 hu@\j
``
 2\hh
 QQ\7Ouh5
' {u\@`G 2.
 	 S\
 \`@@ff  @\h@hK  h{  h
 `\h
GO\
 `{\nF
 K Ou.\ 
 u 	 @\h@{u{`
 ^`\u @
' Q^huO@ 7Q 	 {
 ]n
  }
 K] 	 u6\hu
 *u\`@
 6 	 O`uG\  J
 } 	 @\j
@\\u\h\7`ff  I
 O{uu
 u\h^\` 	 *
   ]j`
 2@\juh@G2Q\`\G 	  
  +
 ]nQ
{26\ 26u\h 	  	 $
 u\.Z_G\6G`
 *`$2@\j
:
 ~ GG\ 2,u\Y7&  u\
 ~$\ h\h
Yw>B
 \u*u\h 
 .u 	 >wG"{  2\hK{ 	 uh7hh{
.\u
 \$K7u\{uA
 {\`hu 	 @\h@{ 	 h@

',./*ERM643032?;=6PP:8On@GMOY6<ff6843;=691H]:8T*<R;F;=9]T1H]-/10321476P2dR+C"8"032<R:\];.;=6PR47H];CBDJ;FR07\];F21@R<.O07@GMO032?91:POY032?5,
5,n/5434.479";FD?6P6@R;G682*9"E=:P2?/?;F8,
1

fi Y\qp$X[\i\q

i7Y\rr{i7Y]



Aj b
Zj b
` 5A W=. b
 `1ffA WCY  
b
ZjJ
ZjJ b
Z .*1Z W= Z=. b
Z .*1Z W8 A=. b



$ 
$  _
   _
_J_  _
_J_  _
 p 
 p 

'Y  .  ,hK 	 `u7Gu 	 G &I

*

 j  }
 j  }
   _J}
    }
    }
 jJ}
 }
 jJ

\uh

 '@ 27Yh 6\nFG\G&~{2u
@\h@]IK  uh;h@`I
 
 ~@ @\j$IK`;h
uu76` 	 $ `G)
( G 	 \  \
 K\, '@G\\.7
u2.`` \\u*Q\
 h 2 	 h{\ K 	 @\h@`
^\,G u&u 	 u  \& 	 K\
 
 G@ 
 6{`u\
`u\{ 	  	 u{7u@
' ^.h \
 u7
' `7
 h\
	 u 	 \h@`\h{\u7&@
\Y
 .O\`G 	 Ou7Gu
Ghu\\`:$u\

lnmL
 	

4 XnUff 4 XYr

p

Z b [ a [WIXU0 a [W0Quwv 4 X.r

u\.62^)

u\\h

G$\

\`K`h


	 \

.u\`

	 uu`*\u` 	 @\j

7^\u2O`hG`*`2h

2\hG\   {O7`{hGh@2Q\Q*

\u@\j

\u{hu\

 ;\7`@hu\Q2\@

'{\\6\\h6Y;h u;{hY26\h.7$ 	 @\h@]
 u\ 2\]@K.h\\u 	 \ 	 
u\h$2h`\
 @\h@ \\* 	  O;hS2
\\u   \\u
 \ .`hn
? S \u 
9 
 
 6
 u7\=&IM
 h\uh$
 K.^2h
; `\`\hh
; h,p; 
; \u`
 )
  	 h2\{\h{u\`
	 uMh *uO
u\\h& 	 ,G{ \`K@\\h$h,.
+  h
 $Ku
 * 2{
'   h@FG\\O 	] $\h 	 u7 Gu.Fu 	 uFuh&I

 \77$
?B.u\{\hu @
' h 	 h@6@ w?   Z=WCW=Z=. 
 u

 `G)
 ^\Q* 	 \jF
 \77Q2\hQ.,
 ^7
hu`@G\h{6 	 2@  	 _  _  {
 \nF
  \
 9 *u@O2.^ 	
\uQ.Oh 0 {`\h{  $]F
 
 h,
 {uO2\y_   
\
 5@
' K\   	 u\ 	 uS2hB\uS6 	 hh7w
 {
{\Y
   Q_Y
 \    ,
 {un
?  `\Q*

5,w:@R;X1M*:8OY;=;F8X*@GM?6@Y2?:@n6P4349'03V;F;F21@>DJ:<G07@G07:P2?<>KL:P\6]9"03J;F;21@>KL;=6@G/1;A;CE=@R:PwOY07@GM@GM?;W<GDV;=EF03?;=9NKL;=6@G/5;=<
6<M?6<nTJ;=;F2DV:P0321@R;=9:8/*@nT1HtffKL68M5R032?;FSR+="F,


fiUWfV XYZ$X[Y]\

	 \ ffu\uh  uu 	 u@72Fu`\h{;h
 	 h < '@^\.u
`h"
# "
! T-
% %) \7!@K
9 h
; 
 =
 u{  
h\uG@\h@`\h2`G\huff G
I hI\h6&7$@^2hB\u
\K 	 h
 h{hOh2u
 )
 h\\6\
 G\hG@`h
?^O\.u
 uu@@\h Z
 &\`& &
 {\\u
 	 
 @}\h{h7O^\.u\u.u 	 \
 `,
 `\h{
\
 \h2 \\u7 	 \
 @,
 ^7\h @h
@
'  	 @h\)u
 \h@2Q2uI
 \h@{\7 	 
``\
\`\ 	 \
  	 .u K OO\


`.`\u

lnmLl



a v Z

HI6Gj

2 ZW b X 4 X.r

p

Z b [ a [ZB

4 [ 4 UXz b ZZ

2 ZuW b X 4 XYr

	 @\j`${Gu;{\7@@7
hu.2\`@\{\h$$@}O 	 h
; {2@
 @\\u\h6\nF
 $dF
 
u\)u
 \2,\u `hu\Ou\h72,u\{
hu\=@
' ^\ \ 	 `\nF
 ^ @} u\u `
' h\
&
 \ 2,u\$@$G$\ u
 `)( 62 \`\ 	
,
 \)
 K\
 G^h$G`G`K``)( @K\`\ 	 u )
 G
 
\h\h67>lff \ \u-!]%F
 \}O{hu{7@6\
 $\ F\ Y\h
G
' Ou  	 u\u\
 \2,u\{\u{7hu.2\
uG\*
 @`u`)(  	 uWTF
 u`@ 	 2K7
 u&\
 
 2K\u
  ]j
 l{  ^u\u ``)( }p
 u
,
 @hFu` / KQ2Ou\h
 u  	 2QO7  N
 _  ;fi @
 
 `\ \ `^77
 `7O\ Q``)( .u 	 u`hG

'   	 &\jF

  	 u2 \h@`\u7$&\h6h\\u\ \
 
2K@\h 	 {\u @&@F\
   OB{u@u 	 
h$h\
 6 	 & ff `\.u
 h\\
 6\
  O\\hBKu&u` 	
`uKh.\7 @
' 
 @\h@]  } 	 h
; @O\
 O\2\u}
un
? O\`.
 ~\h2,Q7hu\I
 u
\G
 h
 h\hu
 ^\ ^,
  K
9 
\
 @@F\{h\\ 	 6hh\7
 j
  \ u 	 K@
\` 	 uO\
 `Q \\ 7^@\h u.O&@
' `u *
uQ\{2Qh
 h\hu  	 7u`O 	 O7I
 \7^u,
 
uO 	 Q\,
 . \)
 `
 {G,
  h)
 O\
 {\ @GQh\\
h7{7hu 	 \h@hu\
 \O7h$G
; \h{OB
 Khun
?  h 	 u \7{h\`\
 O  \h
hh\\\
 @B`Oh
 h\hu 	 {7KhG`G 	 2{
.\@\u`

',YM107<07<;=;2OY:P<R;032@GM*;/*<G/?6P4*;D5;=<R;21@R6@G07:P2:8KJ@GM507<ffD1:PT147;=\LN/*P47;=@R:82X?Y6P032X">68H;=<GN07EM107;XJIN07EM107;X
+C^FXOYM?;F;032?<R@R;=69Z:PK?@GM?; bd" bb ;476@G07:P2X16 b   D5;=9"07E=6@R;07<P07;F2]032S@GM*;ffT*6E[18:P/12*9]["2?:8O47;C95;,
 2@GM507<n;FD5;C<R;F21@R6@G07:82XOYM507ERMOY03434ffTJ;/?<R;=9N03268434:P/1A;=BDJ;R07\];F21@R<=X*R/147;=<A]6P2?9WM*68;W@R:WTV;>;FKL:P\A/1476@R;=9
/?<G032*@GM*; b   D5;C9'07E=6@R;XJOYM507ERM07<n:P2147HNDJ:<R<G03T147;W03K;=6EM:8Kff@GM?;=\07<;D5476E=;=9O07@GM@GOY:Z2*;=O!R/147;=<=,
5,wE=@G/*684347HXY5, \S6B07\W07=;C<0321KL:P\]6@G07:P2
68032X?OM107ERMN07<>EC:\WD1/*@R;C9tT1H<G/5T?@G6EC@G032*@GM?;A6P;F6;A;F21@G:PD1H]K:\
6820325KL:8\]6@G07:82d86843/*;Z@GM*6@Y07<>E=:82*<R@R6821@KL:8n6P434E=:82*<G0791;F;=9@R;=<R@R<=,

"

fi Y\qp$X[\i\q

i7Y\rr{i7Y]

u.^\ 	 u`2), 	 ff   \ \\2\uh
	 u u \\.&@  $jQl{  }KG6\7Q$\h\
@\h@@}\h{h
; h7{\7\u `h&@\h hO\ 	 u7 h
\ \*. 9
9 `\ *

 $G*\ Q2)u
    	 \7hu.2\`u`)
( h\.\7 h
7u`u\` 	  .Q\y
 {`\
 \n .`h`\\u@
u\
 ^{dF
 {u\h2,Y
 \^2u
hO`
9 \\\
 \)
 ^\
 `\.@\j @ Oh
j
 h\hu  	 \h@\^@,
 G`\
 I
 \@ O77
 	 K\{\u]&
 O\\)(  	 u 2{\*hu\h
 ^hu.2\`{
 ^``, \\u 7
	 u@\h@]$
hu.2\`-@
' 
 \*
 h^*@7\`O\7Q2O@ h\\
 
@@7h@@`\G 	 u.^\  \
 O .h\*G
u`

lnm

U0
W

4 XzZff a XnFWIXB 1

ff"`\h@\j\^}#J!]#!]h`\ ;d 7
ff)
 \
 GG}Q7h$ \
  	 &u2h6`uG\
 6\ 6@h\h
\ 	 u`&u\uhu.Gff 	 $6Ghh
  7h
  	 
 {\G
\ 	 u 	 {u7$u
 @\h@QG\7h
; {Gu;  \
 \7K
 \h
hF\
 {\
 {\Q \\2{@\j .{{7^\uh
9 \@`h\. 	 uIG\` 	 @)

 \uh{Gu`\ $7@j
 h\h7
`\hFdF
 )
 7K 	 @\h@^\uh]
 K 	 u\\ 
 G{\^Wu
; h  	
\\h\h\h@O\u&9 `u
 u{2OGu
; Q
 h
  K.6@G 	 N%!]#T"%!]v%dY
 p)T%!!]}%dY
 #I8A n
  $2 	 Y` \
O\ 	 \uh-@
'   Z
  K\dB
? h




d ? R   * ?  R


 
  R
' J
"  

 '  ' 
 'J
Kx. Q2^u\`*O 	  h7A
`^\`\ 	 h.\7Q 

 O\Q*
 	 jh 	 u{h7\
d 7\ 	 u@2  hQ 
"  \{   jh 	
h2\
A{
 7\@ 	 u``hGu\K2\  	  .\)`h
u$ 	 Ghj@`u2\\u`. 	 u\\Oh`h\Qh
 
uh(  W h 	 h@.








	


 



d

ff

?  

'

S

R_





'@u h( u 	 h7uG
 {Q,u`\ jh\ K   Zh\KK
'
'  h)(hu6.\*` \
R
 

R  
"  
 @ h h \  G         `u\  `^\
hG I
 OQ\`hSQh\*u\O\{277 	 .\
 
 u\
 6
 G
 ` 	 \u 2\h`\jF
 ` 	 h`\h`

fi

',YM107<;C/*6843qK ;=/*;2*E=H<G/1T1G<R6\WD143032*\];=@GM?:"9tM?6<Y5<R@TJ;=;F295;=<RER03TJ;=9NT1H;F07\]682X 5R07;=91\]6P2X47<GM?;F2X?6P2?9
"@R:P2?;NR+=^KL:8>91H2?6\W07E=68434H9"6POY032?N6<G/1T*<R6\WD547;6@;C6ERM2*:"91;W032695;CEF07<G07:P2I@G;C;K:\OYM507ERMd@GM?;>TJ;=<R@
<GD14307@>KL:Pw@GM107<Y2*:"91;07<w95;C@R;F\W032?;=9,  2 1,3A07@07<n/*<R;C9@R:]<R;=;=9@GM*;>032107@G076P4.OY032*91:8O,





fiUWfV XYZ$X[Y]\


  	 2B
? 7Q7Q@$
 Gu\
 ^\
 h2^`.\
ff)@hGu\`u *`u\

u `h
h7
\2W?B

9

 \ \n .@\\hO\d?B^\

O`\.@=HF\   .

^`K\h$\nF 





'  $`7h <R}d#n
@
	 )(K7  `,hhuGu`@\n .${{\G5'@
\u*GK7 2 u 	 * \
 hu 	 Y\\.hGu$ 	 R"%!hK
27`{\h{2Q2h{uh{u
  	 u`u7
.O\\ O`*&
H \
F
    fi@
' Qu*u\O\^7
u\G)OK 	 \
 jG
 
 u\h7\hIuu
  	 7 	 u
*h\7hu*O\7Qu
 u.K*u\

 {u 	  \huhG\dB
? \,
 \KGh
; 7^hu\
\h\nF
 O.uK 	 
 \h}\
 `\nF
 K\u.{ 	 \
 
\
 Q .h\
'   \h 	 7{u\
 O\nF
 {\
 	 
 h  u\O
 \u @O\h u2h u
\
 K2\h@{,
 
 hO 	 {Gu\\
 \h
{,
 .`hG,
 hO7-ff GGu\
 \@ 	 
  	 u K
Ou,
  O {hh\\Q.\\
 KO\ 	 u K
@hG,
  @ 2u*K\ &$uh`uu\
  	 u$
Gu.6 ff  `\F
H \
   7O 	 h\ uh
 Q2hO$Gu
\u\uh\7h
\h@@G
 $7$\jF
 \uF 	 \{Gh>ff 	 7u`
\7  	 {\
 O\  .Ohh\
 u@
 `u
 @ 	 
u{G\^h\\ `@\h O
  \
 h \ \7\h{2h
; @ 	 
\
 K\2\u@`u\\u\h7 	 u$7\h2,uG^hu.2\`
\ 	 u\)
 \2,u\@\u. 7h\` * 	 u`7h
{\\\ff {
  7u\
 G@@F\K`@\h@^hu.2\ 	 u&
u7`@\ Kh`Kh 	 \G\
  \.u\
@hK\\2;h

G6\$







$}





   >



  & 

{\hO\\\ 	

.K7@\h@

\hu^\\\,
@\h@

2^7h\

hhhu \7h7Q

	 

\\&9uuu7O@6h\`uO

\@\h

G\\27huh

u.uu7@ 



h\
\\u\

u 	 @\h@]62\^ 	 h`\h^ 	 
\h\h@O .h\,
 ^ { K* 	 \G\ \\
h7I
 & 	 O\ 	 )
 uh77 :?B\h
u.\
 GO\
  \u\@ud!]p}T T!]#% "!




wmGo

VBZ!vqrU ,b 46 >
V 0

'@@hu.2\ hK $\  2$+.7$7;h\h@@\h@].$ \u 2\
 	 $\
 h$Gu. 	 u&{7FFu{26h{
jG  u@{\hG@\h@]hY\6Y`.`h\Ou7Oh7j?





fi Y\qp$X[\i\q

i7Y\rr{i7Y]

  
 !

^_`abdcde_bN7i ,o  g fhgji,kl,m5gniporqtsvuwxDyzj{}|R~)R,))}{}~)*wuR,}{
 ,&ikvl<qTsvuwxyzj{}|~R)){ 
 }{ |}p svuwxDyzj{}|]  )
 zj zj{}|
_b^bd
 { zj{}|]7i,kpvq  ,,
, {R>  { zj{}|]  zj zj{}|
 {  ),*
 zj  {}|}ph
 `d_WsvuwxDyzj{  {}|
 {}|}r  {}|svuwxDyzj{
  p}Rg rq , {R~suwxyzj{    <qtsvuwxDyzj{
 {  ),  {  ),&svuwxyzj{
bb
 zj  {|]  zj  {}|svuwxyzj{
 *  {  )  &wudR,} {
bd    `d_
 {}|i,kDq  {}|})~  zj  {}| 
 ),fi  ,&  {  ),&  l  $q  zj zj{}|"
 zj zj{}|rh
 `d_ zj{N , {R
  lipg ,i ]q zj{}~  {  ,,
 zj zj{}|]  zj zj{}|]
zj{
 ),fi  )  l  rq zj{ 
e    {  )&
_bdde_dvq , {RR

#"%$

&"%$

#"($
)"%$

&"%$

#"%$

 '

#"%$

#"%$

* + ,"%$
#"%$ -"%$
 . ,"%$

$u\  .5ff7uh){\h@]
	 uu{7huY\O 7`, 	 .uM`@\hS 	 
,u77M
9 `u7\.u$K \ O,
uh7O\`\`\\h
 \hK\O{.`\h
u@hG
 h*}uh\
\K2\h \hG66\7^h62K\GK  
! 7K
 `h7n
? 
 
\@\ 	 \5@
'  \\.`u7G \
 @O* .``\^huh
2
 O7hu
 hG
 I
 7Q`*{\]
 G`\
 \`\h
`,
 \
 `\hO,
  	 u @\h 3h
;  
@\h )
( `hFu\h^`
`@\h

0/ 0QuwvZ$0

wmL

ZX

6 W 64 UFX

'^7@O\\IGO`hYh\`  `uHffF~F\\u
I@}
 uu `\\ j
 h=
 hH \ '^` hu.2\`
&
 ~\
 \ {\h72,u\K{hu\^ 	 uh7uhh@
.\.7Q^`7u\Q.7u 	 u&O\\] G
u
 `
h7 	 @\h@^hGhK$
 u\  2\hGK@@\h@\\O.u\
 ~
 G
]\
 `h\S\ 67uh$\h@`7 
 ~h&hK`$
 u\  
96 u\`O.O`7 _}h7O\u`I
  7I
 2u.\h\7`\h

21 43#56783#9;:<

1 43#567=3?>8@

A



fiUWfV XYZ$X[Y]\

\)

h)\h7 	 
 h6\O\ Q`,^7

	 u

hK*)IhF\\hK.OG2O

huh)5\hG

	 O\\u   2Q.KhF@}u 	 u&)
	 G,\\G\7`6\\
  ;fi&G  9 $,((  {
 |
 G
;     
ffO\`\`\\`&\`u\hu@\u \hY\\\ u 	 
h)
 @\h@\`6\h@ \ K\h2,G7
@\hG 	 
 \h)( W
  	 u77O 	 u\h@h \
 {)( I
 \
GK 	 u\h&\h&
   I 	 K\
 @2G*hY{,
  
 \h
@\u \@\{`,
 @^ \ K7h7F
. \ 	 u$\
 
 
hK^h72\hO=&IM
 \u`uhG 	 G
; Qu2`
\\ 	 uhF 	 O 
 ^uOhY`{\,
 h7
Kh7K\  h$\77Q`uh6K` 
; u\ h,+ h{\\
~u`7O\
 ` 	 *    7 \,
 u\ 	 

 \
 ``\\.u\ 	 u{.`,u
 \O.&9 	 
 B
? \hY2u\h{\2 	 Q u\`
 h 	 {{{u
 Q `u\ u\2^u\`*{ 	 
 
,
 N
 ~7@ Q2`h,
 h*
 hK7
\
 K@,
 . Oh,
 Oh5ff 	 ]*
 OOK
 G
' 
\\O\{`{d^
 @Fu\O* 	 u`uO  2{
 	 h 	 2{\Ohu.2\`
\hG

@\.`hu



`  \6@`\Ghu\`

wmLl

@tswuZ b4 0ZX 6 WvtIZ 6ha u

   	 2 	 \uh ffh
	 @\juh
	 \\.@h 2h 7Q7(=u{h7h
`)(  \nFQ2\` 	 `)
( G 	 .u O 	 \hn?
\ 9F\{hu\
 ~ G
\
  G
` . \h
 	 &\$O2  	   
 *`$G6
 hu h\\.$G
`h2\OGh\h{ 	 &`uu 66\
 GYO&h\7
 	 hu\ # F
' \
 ``u^u
  ` \`\`h7
\\\@\`
  hO`h\.G \`\$ 	 \
 6\ $ . \.u7^
{\h u\ 
 u
 ~
 @u\`\ \hF{2K)(  	 {\7
 
 
 K 	 uG2O@\h@hu\@K{u\7 h@2O\ 	 O7h
&)
(   	 h7huG 	 \h@]
 uK2 	 h
 &\u$\h$ 	 hu
\`\`` 	 `hu\
 7\hK\@G`h`\h$7
u\ 	 u@\7.
'  	  	 uK.hu@ 	 \hOd
 
 GO@Y\
O\7O\}
 
 @$
 u\&   (
9 I

 *`7@hK*hGu@O 	 !]TTr   j  

! r     @
' O7K.O\\7uh]  
\
\u 

\7

G^7Q

B1 43#567=3?9;:<

D

FE

HG

C1 43#56783#>8@

JI

5,;=6<G/5;C9x032 Y z<R;=E=:82*91<N:8KZ6U\Z07EF:""J n++ >NR/12125032?xE=:\WD10347;=9jn4347;=P:Y:\S\]:P2 07<GD!EC:"95;
/12*91;F w 2107BN1, +, 1,
5, ;>9"079]2*:@YE=:\ZD5/?@R;>@GM107<Y\];=6<G/5;C\];F21@YKL:P.@GM?;;CBDJ;FR07\];F21@R<Y0322?:P07<RH95:\]6P032?<AL<R;=E=@G07:82TJ;=EC6P/?<R;>@GM?;>OY68H
OY;AEC:\WD1/*@R;Z@GM?;AE=:\WD147;=@R;F2?;=<R<AERM*;CE[L<R;=E=@G07:82
', ', 032186P4307916@R;=<Z@GM?;=<R;A\];=6<G/5;=\S;F21@R<=,

2L

'D KD

M





fi Y\qp$X[\i\q

{uh
2\u
&I&
&I&
&I "\u 
' 2Y
G
' h2
' 

6\. ~\u7

~)( 
  _,
 
 
 
  
  j 

 

 

i7Y\rr{i7Y]

`*aSb=cJn{ u`?a]bCc
   }
  _
}
_  }
 
   }
_    }

  }

IG\
    }
    d}
    }
_    }
]  d}

N

'
_.-{uh O\\.Fhu^227(I2Q\ 	 u7O 	  ]j
@@\j 
   ]j
 @u{\h@]$
 h 	 u^.\
 	 O\h

wm

U0
W

4X [

hh\hhu\`uhj

	 h\^2 	 ^2h 7
9 K\ uu
	 uI  ff 7 	 hHI7h\ &
\\
_j K\u`Gu7\
 u  	 O`h:
 )`\uh
\`\h\{ 	 +,u.h 	 uMhh ff &I
uh
\u G@\u*u\h$u 	 2Ku.\ Bhu\ \u
T
 2
u@h7  hKh\uG\@ 	  \G\h&u*uK2
j  	   \nF@` 	 B27 uG 	   `5ffr
 
  
 u j
huO\ <;uu\=
; h@\
'
_h@@{hFu\`*@ 	 \
  h
 h 	 uGh\u 2Oh 	
hQ\` 	
 $j
 2@\h@ 
 ph
; 2\`7 J|{ 
2  ]j
 @u`@\h@]3@
' h`\ h@`.\ 	 \h
 ^2   @u\u\hY*u\huu^\7R_   ff .^u
``\"uh)
   uh7*,G\ 	 u7 	& ]j {@\j
hu.2\
\`h2\ '
ff 7h$
 `@  ]j uB
?  
G 	   h{  2\h G``^*Ku @`2  	 @\j
; `N@
' {uu
 7K2
 )O
 \uh\
 K@\j
 
	 u-ff  7h
h`7K\h 	  	 $j @\`

POPQ

&R&R S

UT

WV

wm

Z[
a

v6
[

$u\-h@Y2  \hh@\Q* 	 \\Q2 7\`K 	 u
\{hu\@y
 p}%% \uh 
{7`@`\{dF){
\u $
 hh 	 u{ 
]
 I{\\,u 
u* 	 `{@\j`{ 	 \`
 K^un
? 
\nF
 K `@ 	 h\7h
ff  \hK\ @\,
 2,u\ G
\
*u   
 7hu 	 u`@$u
 @h& 	 2S\h)( 
 	 *u_      
  G
\Q*u``\Q* 	 h7

X1 (3?5-6783#9;:<

ZY

X1 (3?5-6783#>8@

[1 43#567=3?9;:<

\1 43#56783#>8@
+ZG5,YM?;t\S;=6<G/1;E=:P/14792?:@ATJ;E=:\ZD5/?@R;=9UKL:8]@GM?;   $ )zj{ 95:\]6P032XTJ;CE=6P/?<R;@GM507<]91:\S6P032E=:P21@R68032*<]2"/?\];FR07E=684
6@R@GR03T5/?@R;=<=XJOYM507ERME=68252?:@nTJ;>M*682*9"47;=90326]<R@G6P078M1@GLKL:POY689NKL6<GM107:P2,
]



fiUWfV XYZ$X[Y]\

Mushroom: Test Accuracy
% Correct
DOS
WIN-DOS-3.1
WIN-DOS-95

100.00

99.50

99.00

98.50

98.00

97.50

97.00

96.50

96.00

95.50
Train Exs x 103
0.00

2.00

4.00

6.00

8.00

Mushroom: # Examples processed by DOS

Mushroom: Train Time

Learning Exs x 103

Seconds
DOS
WIN-DOS-3.1
WIN-DOS-95

8.00
7.50

28.00

7.00

26.00

6.50

24.00

6.00

22.00

5.50

20.00

5.00

18.00

4.50

DOS
WIN-DOS-3.1
WIN-DOS-95

30.00

16.00

4.00

14.00

3.50
12.00
3.00
10.00
2.50
8.00

2.00

6.00

1.50
1.00

4.00

0.50

2.00
0.00

0.00
Train Exs x 103
0.00

2.00

4.00

6.00

8.00

Train Exs x 103
0.00

$u\:]. IG{2dp}%%

2.00

4.00

6.00

8.00

\uh

&1 (3?5-6783#9;:<

  G@\h  ff  t 
\\`
   
 @~\ G
``\u@\h 	  	 2
  \
$u\{2jY\ $@u\`* hh`$ 	 $2h\h7O\6 	 *u
 6@hKGK*GKhG  } u76
   
HI7 	 u     \`
 {\{K@
hG\ 	 . 	 SW
 ~^ \h\}
 5@
' 
 @\uh
 `* 	 uh
u\{`\h@h
 @\h@\\Oh
 @7\u \]
 G$u\@2\hF&u7h$\2O\ 	 u``{\h@O\h7`.7
 u\.`
$
 h@Qh\7h 7\`Q27 	 uG\`hu\`  ( 
  ( 
\u *
' \..Q{\``{$
 u\]. G
`7`
\dF
 )
 {\2\uh
 h&  	 u&62hG)( Z
 {\G\.
 fi
 .u
\G .;h@`u@2\

\1 43#56783#>8@

*u

[1 43#56783#9;:<

^

8

fi Y\qp$X[\i\q

i7Y\rr{i7Y]

KRK: Test Accuracy

KRK: Train Time

% Correct

Seconds
DOS
WIN-DOS-3.1
WIN-DOS-95

100.00
99.90

17.00

DOS
WIN-DOS-3.1
WIN-DOS-95

16.00
15.00

99.80

14.00

99.70

13.00
12.00

99.60

11.00

99.50

10.00
99.40
9.00
99.30

8.00

99.20

7.00

99.10

6.00

99.00

5.00
4.00

98.90

3.00

98.80

2.00
98.70
1.00
98.60

0.00
Train Exs x 103
0.00

2.00

4.00

6.00

8.00

Train Exs x 103

10.00

0.00

2.00

KRKN: Test Accuracy

4.00

6.00

8.00

10.00

KRKN: Train Time

% Correct

Seconds
DOS
WIN-DOS-3.1
WIN-DOS-95

100.00

7.00

DOS
WIN-DOS-3.1
WIN-DOS-95

6.50
6.00

99.50

5.50
99.00
5.00
4.50

98.50

4.00
98.00
3.50
97.50

3.00
2.50

97.00
2.00
96.50

1.50
1.00

96.00

0.50
95.50
Train Exs x 103
0.00

2.00

4.00

6.00

8.00

0.00

Train Exs x 103
0.00

10.00

2.00

$\. IG27{  &II=&I&

4.00

6.00

8.00

10.00

\uh

1G43#56783#>8@]F.u2\ 	 u`O\ @\h@{ 	

\7F
 K^2
 \ ff &IM\uh6\\)h\h
	 h
h  }
hO\u     	 Kh$\.^hu\&9@{hG@7h
@7( 
^K``h
 \@ hI`{un?K\nF
'@\` 	 * @\jhu\` ` h7 Q*u`^2`)( ^ 	
  hKOhu  h@\hF@\h@{\$Gh\\u\h
 
u{O7Q\,uu 	 .u
`h O7
( 
' 27@&&I& @\u{\uh@7hG)( K 	 \   
\\` hG
  	 uh7h)( 
 K\\\
$uh`u\\
 \h7@\j`h
; Gun
? 7\`7
	 u OOh2O7
un?\n .`

21 (3?5-6783#>8@

8p

fiUWfV XYZ$X[Y]\

Tic-Tac-Toe: Test Accuracy

Tic-Tac-Toe: Train Time

% Correct

Seconds
DOS
WIN-DOS-3.1
WIN-DOS-95

100.00
99.00

DOS
WIN-DOS-3.1
WIN-DOS-95

2.20
2.10
2.00

98.00

1.90

97.00

1.80

96.00

1.70

95.00

1.60

94.00

1.50

93.00

1.40

92.00

1.30

91.00

1.20

90.00

1.10

89.00

1.00

88.00

0.90

87.00

0.80

86.00

0.70

85.00

0.60

84.00

0.50

83.00

0.40

82.00

0.30

81.00
0.20

0.40

0.60

Train Exs x 103
1.00

0.80

Train Exs x 103
1.00

0.20
0.20

0.40

KRKP: Test Accuracy

0.60

0.80

KRKP: Train Time

% Correct

Seconds
DOS
WIN-DOS-3.1
WIN-DOS-95

100.00
99.00

95.00

DOS
WIN-DOS-3.1
WIN-DOS-95

90.00
85.00
80.00

98.00

75.00
70.00

97.00

65.00
60.00

96.00

55.00
95.00

50.00
45.00

94.00

40.00
93.00

35.00
30.00

92.00

25.00
20.00

91.00

15.00
90.00

10.00
5.00

89.00

0.00
Train Exs x 103
0.00

0.50

1.00

1.50

2.00

2.50

3.00

Train Exs x 103
0.00

0.50

1.00

1.50

2.00

2.50

3.00

$\  .5IG27K2 'G2'Yh2'=&I&\uh

. .

'\\u`uuu  27 G ^ ^%\`\h ''
hK2{u\u 	 $
 u\  Z@.\O\\)h\  	 h\Ohu.2\`
h  }  6\u@\h 	  \
 &)( 5ff 7 
{h
@\Gu\ lh6\_  
   Z
 {@26\ G
KG{h
 O^hh
 h@,
 N
 ~`G 	 \`
 huuG`G\7
7h
; \h$$Gu,
 h
; 5
 ~ $`2hO&)(  
Qh
{\; 
 \ `{uu\\`un
? {uh\7
h@.G 7@)
( 

1 43#56_783#9;:<
81 43#56783#9;:<
X1 43#56_783#>8@
)L

++,w:@R;A@GM?6@n@GM507<w;=B"6\ZD547;Z<R;=@Y07<>:82547H6]<G/5T?<R;=@n:PK@GM?;AY07EFff6EFff:";w956@R6t<R;C@@GM?6@YM?6<YTJ;=;2<R@G/*9"07;=9NT1H I03@GM
682*9Y6@G47;C@R@R+C"F, ;A9"079N2*:@M?68;Z6E=EC;=<R<n@R:]@GM*;>K /5434956@R6t<R;C@=,

4L

8?

fi Y\qp$X[\i\q

i7Y\rr{i7Y]

ffh6\hOu7\. 	 Y  	  \u`\ 	 .uM
\F
   ff27  GuhO
 `W}J
# !]#!]
  6\u  ] ff  \ &I&h2{u
`{\F
 hu.2\`OO7uO2\hO  }Mu7K
7Q`@u7@h6\GGh 	 u ]N@7 2\h$
hO2  }
 \hhK 	 hK2\77h\
 \`
\h\\.
 hu 	 uG2{Oh\ $
 {GuhF2`  !]%! }dJ
# !]#!$\
 h
@`G*{K {\hG\u``,
 `u 	 \
 KY .h\^F
 G
2u&ff 2{\h 
\O\u{@h{
 
h
 ~ 	 Gh @)( 
 {\\,
 =
 u 	 @\h@]
 u2O\
\&uQ 	  `uG\
 6\ 
 ~hYhG)( u
 \&`${\@{\
 
uQ\{ 	 2O\u h@@7h7@)
( @
  O7\ u
 \
 Q,\$h{}
 u \7F 	 G\
 G\h
	 uF\Y*$\ F
}\\7u    @
' O`u`@\
 u:B
? \$
 KhG
\h& \h\
  	   \h{G@^u,
 7h@\ 	 u\^  	 uS2h
 Y
 ,+ u. 	 7\
 h ,
 7h^ 
 u,,\u
R`h7  fiff 7uu$
 hG
 Q
 h `\h7F
 K
`u. G 2  $j `\ 	 u^ \uhY
'  _
 \u
\\u 	 u$2 * 	  	 u\$\h@^ u\` @
' &&I& 
 
 
Gu@\ 	 u7{K@\@hu\`u\&\dB
? uI
 \h@`\7
\7h{\&I h`7 	 u K @\jGu
; @Q\7
 u\.  h@{:  j  \
$
 
 p)
 \uh&
 u@2{\hF
 
\7hG&$ j
 h^  $j  
    @
' Kh\7h`u\&hK\ 	 u7
 	 hu\`{O7K7 @
' ^\\*O\h 	 h@K2.OK7hu
`uh Y
 72u 	 OhG
 @u  hn
? h7  Q
 &
@\h@^hu.2\`@\ 	 u u
 u\ GI2G\uhu
 2 
*
*u$@ h 	 h$h 
>ff ` 	 h\  
@6` h\7h
\ \ { u\` G
\h  	 
 ~
9 O`
 
`\hQh)
 h
; Gh7Q\2\u "*u  }  	 \
  	 h  
GK\\h2{hu\@u{
 7O\u ^@\2K*{ 	 
\)
 Ouh)
 
  
'  27 7`G 	 \`{\G\A
 @hG
 
{ 	 h\h
 \ 	 u 	 
 ~\.
 I
 \h{{\\h G
@ G
\**$
  O\
 OG 	 u\`u\
 \hu 	 G
\u`
lff 667``G\h&6G@u\h`GK\
 @.\h6 Gu\
h2\
  \\  ^`u@}\. @
' \h7
\2\ 	 {h7\G\`hj
 .2^
 	 j
 h 	 uh2\ TI
 uh  ff t  _   ',+ K
9 @\j
hu.2\`G@,\h\
 K`u \. 	 .u Q`hG\
 {
 
7h
; \n .\\  \ ^*)
 ^,
 ,
?   
uh7
 uhG\2 }\`7  6
 QdF
 ^hhG^u*7u
K\hQ .h\ * 7yG`h6
     \h`\ 	 \ 
 u.
; u 
 p%)T!
   h  _  
 h77 GGu`
2h

8

%1 (3?5-6783#9;:<

C1 43#56_783#>8@
+1 43#56_783#9;:<

X1 43#56_783#9;:<
X1 43#56783#>8@

`1 43#56783#9;:<

C1 43#56783#>8@

+8',YM?;A<R:P@G032?NE=68/*<R;=<n@GM?;A<G4307PM1@G47H<G/5DV;FRL43032*;=68]<G47:8DJ;A032@GM*;>R/125@G07\];ZEF/1;=<n:8KAA*,
8

fiUWfV XYZ$X[Y]\

Binary Shuttle (+): Test Accuracy

Binary Shuttle (+): Train Time

% Correct

Seconds
DOS
WIN-DOS-3.1
WIN-DOS-95

100.00
99.98

750.00

99.96

700.00

99.94

650.00

99.92

DOS
WIN-DOS-3.1
WIN-DOS-95

800.00

600.00

99.90
550.00
99.88
500.00

99.86
99.84

450.00

99.82

400.00

99.80

350.00

99.78

300.00

99.76

250.00

99.74
200.00

99.72

150.00

99.70
99.68

100.00

99.66

50.00

99.64

0.00
Train Exs x 103

99.62
0.00

10.00

20.00

30.00

Train Exs x 103
0.00

40.00

Binary Shuttle (-): Test Accuracy

10.00

20.00

30.00

40.00

Binary Shuttle (-): Train Time

% Correct

Seconds
DOS
WIN-DOS-3.1
WIN-DOS-95

100.00
99.98

850.00

99.96

800.00

99.94

750.00

99.92

700.00

99.90

DOS
WIN-DOS-3.1
WIN-DOS-95

900.00

650.00

99.88

600.00

99.86

550.00

99.84

500.00

99.82
450.00

99.80

400.00

99.78

350.00

99.76

300.00

99.74
99.72

250.00

99.70

200.00

99.68

150.00

99.66

100.00

99.64

50.00

99.62

0.00
Train Exs x 103
0.00

10.00

20.00

30.00

40.00

Train Exs x 103
0.00

10.00

20.00

30.00

40.00

$\  . IG27{ O\)()`\uh
ff\Q. \{2j\h@un?O\``u \h
@\j"\ @u@h\h  
 
 `u{@uh7{@
\h@  j
 , 	 2 	 `\uh
 h 
 \
 G\
 Qh\h{\
 	 hhu\u 	 uGd 7
 { 	 @\j$I
 \h 	 \G\
 uh7
 	 \uh\@hK\u` 	 u 	 \.@
@

 bU
Wa c

wm

edW

6 ZUFX

b W0Z

6 Z b BZ 664 XYrB[

9*`7 *u\,{GO\ 	 u7`@ !$"T7   y  d!7    
{nF
 j
 h7@ 	 !]TTr \7`G\{\u    h
  @
' \ @\h h\$&)@6\`7K

81

fi Y\qp$X[\i\q

i7Y\rr{i7Y]

KRK - Varying increments
Examples x 103
Win-DOS-3.1
Win-DOS-95

1.60
1.50
1.40
1.30
1.20
1.10
1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40

Log(Increment)
1e+01

3

1e+02

3

1e+03

3

$u\  .WK\`*{ 	  \\h@hu.2\` 	 uWjuj 
 	 
   !r<\`7 hKu`u\`O   

G^\`hu?B``uQ\ Ku.h

	 2\``u\ 	 u )\   -	 u
\\`fih
 hK 	 K\7` 	 uG\.@\uh
hG $
 G  \`uun
?   	 Q  d!7\`
K*n
? @Ku
 `\ \`\& 	 \
 G\h&* h\\Q @\j:>$u\. 
h@ . 	 \
 \`2    \
  	 &I \u 
 
K j
 y  
! 7 	 u    lu^ u\{7hKu,,
   
' \ 	 u 	 2 hu.2\`7` 	 u\`* 	 \
@
 * 	
O\` ; Ku\h &ff O 	&   \
 I
 \7`
^h)
 )
 \
 h`]ff 	 `^\
 ^h\\@\h 
\ 	 u7\u7h\
 u
 hd   
! r<     
\ 	 uQ*u
h7O 	 \hhu\ \.u7h 	 *u  \
 
 
?B\h@\juh\u]_  \
  @
9 ]  d
! 7   u`@$\
 
\hGO`KuQ\hK\6*u,@h{
 u
 \@\j
hh
; G`u@7huG{u
 A
 ~`@*\
 u&\u}
  	 u 
]
' ``*\u2`uuh
@
 h\h^7 u.\`
 OG@*u.^
	 u@2{GuO\G 	 {7\h{\h@\
' -B
@
? \u2h\@O\.7O\hG\^h  ]j
 \`^7^h\h
hG\h 	  	 2@ `hn
? \
 Z
 h 
 h
  \7{@h 	 uu.\$
;  \h@``uGdF
 )
 @`\uh "{  j
 uh\h$`u\u
\`\^ 
 @`.27\^@\ju
 K7u
	 u@h7uG\7O
\hO

F1 43#56_783#9;:<

f1 (3?5-6783#>8@



8

fiUWfV XYZ$X[Y]\

gY
~ 	



  & 

ih,

  

@G\`u\h@2 	 .
 \uh

 *\h{2Q

@\7hd;2\h`\ 	 h <;h@2 	 .hh
\` ' u` u\ hh@\u* 	 hGuh2 ff
G@ \^

u

up;h^*\u

O\B\7

VnmGo b
U

4 [Z

jd

4 [W

b U

	 \h@@h\h(

\7`u

 vZ]0

9{{d^6hh7{ 	 G\hG@\h@{\\GhK{:$u\  {O\h
u.
 h{\
 u ff \.@\\*\h2  	 72
7hu.2\
\\h@uu @Kh\ 	 u7uh
\uhNff u\&uu\
 Oh\u @@\h@^`\uh
 	 hK2\h u@6`h 	  	 \
 F
  
u*uh`7^@\h 	 u`u
 { u
 {\I
 
@\h @\huQ \6 	 @\h\`
 Z
 @
  	 $
 {\u*uu 	 `
 G@@\h \{`u
	  h7
\ `
 $O `&
 h\ 
 Oh
; O2h; 	 u@2Q7
`Ou\`u{\n^
 
9 \ 	 u\

 @
 \ ^\ 	 
 u27\h u7
u. 	 uS\u^7@\j 	 )
(       
  \h
 \.`h\`\h  }  	 \
B
 ^\ u.@
'  	 u
 u7
u.O@B`h7 	    	 h    
  \@@N@
' 
\
 KF\O \\`{@\h \
 2uG\u\@)(  
9 \`\h
u\hF\h 7Q \u  }

 `u\\h 	  	 
 

@\h
h .uu
 \h{hn
? hu 	 2^\
 `@\h
O 	 hO\"ff { \^h7\`\  `u`\
 \
 Q7\^h\\ 
@\h  u\{7 ,
 7\\ {`\`  fi
' `u+ \
u7@O\
 \. 27{ 	   h`    hQ    
KhG\hG@\h@^{u)
 ^

VnmL

kbU

&Uff`W b Y[

4 [Z  &U.vZ b WIX 6 

4 XnFUff 4 XYr

'@uh7@\jhu.2\ \\7u3]&Ku \
2 	 @\uh
  \ `u`Gujhu\ 6@hu\`$I2\,
uhuh hh\\hu 	 @\h@ \u\.
 ~\
u7^7\h\
 \@\h "\7h
;  
\  
 \$`
 6\
 G{\2\,
 ``\\$7hu ff u7h)
 
@\h@\O2^OuF
 2
 {Y
 `,
 Oh&
 `,
 
 uuh^u\hu\hId^
 
	 u O\h *
ff u\7h{Q\\ 	 u{\u F
 \\.{ 	 2 u\ \
 
^*O`\j
? .

4l

nm

oE

+=5,YM10325[JXff;, 1, XJ:8K A;F2YM?:\WD?<R:P2 <WY n:\]<A:8KYERM?;=<R<A;F2?956\];=<=X@R:tOYM107EM
;=;FHE=:\ZDJ;=@G07@G07;EM?;=<R<>D1:P
86\M?6<Z6P20321@R;FRKL6E=;,QE=:\ZD5;=<R<G07:82:PKn@GM?;=<R;];F2?916\S;=<0321@R:6<G07\WD147;t<R;C@A:PKYR/147;=<ZOY:P/1479dE=;F@R68032547HTJ;
68D5D1;=EF076@R;=9 T1H@GM*;AEC:\WD1/*@R;AERM*;=<R<Y032?9'/?<R@GHd /1R25["682*Xff+C^TVF,

Wfiqp



8

fi Y\qp$X[\i\q

rOUX

r

Kxp!7

4 [ 6 ZXB 1n VIZvBhc 8
[

i7Y\rr{i7Y]

%s

))!$#]&}%

Gp  "!$#%%%#!]%

ffO2 	 hhY7\hG\^@,Guh7{{O \\
	 u\\h@hh@K@`,
u`Ouh7
 {
 
?B\ B2u 
 uG^ u.\h@\

rOU0

u>vZ 6
ff

ZXBZ\[[



rVBZBhc 
8 xp!p%J#

2s

%d##T!p) %Gpd%#

72 	  $ \\u\  @*)\

^ $ GuK 
 u$h2GK\G
K

h

\,.

K@@O2u

?B u\h$ 

*)\

*u\hu

\`h\\7Q2Ou.\h@\h^uK

t

	 2

)s

Z[W0 >
u v4Y
X r>8 xpG"=  r)&p%p)# %##d#fi%Gpd5pd}!]- T!]#%

ffK2 	 {hhF`hn?\K\h 	 6\^ \\^
jG $
 G\
  \,
 \h`h \u`@
@\j$
 \7Q\
 @$\``hn
? `@
@\j:



\


\*



\\\\u7


2\h\h@\\u@}

	 h@u

@;:vu;:<xw>%y5oy'zfiff{2|3}w)~nfi8{4
'@?B${GK\GQ;h@GW?B u 	 $\ 2u*
h\\ B
? \hY2u
 K{u\ 	 \2@\,N9S7hu. 	 u. 
\{```u 	 un
? {u.\^\7`K{7\h{\h
\ 	 .u
\@@\hun
? {OO7@ 	 h
 
O\
 {\
 \`@h
 ^ 	 . u
; hK 	 u 2{7h\
 \ 	 u\\h
`^
  	 @u\{\\7\ 
 u@\
 
 {2\u{\hI
 hOu7h
7
(   N
 _ `7h
; uh7 un
?   ; 
   Y
   
K\7\u 	 \77
 ^uh)
 
 ,
  \nF
 
un
?  	 uM`h\7\u I
 &\  7 	 u
{@\hShGun
? 
 \h\
 G \
 {7 	 u& 	 h@u.N
 u&h {7 	 u 
\G@\h GK\,GOh\7h  N"
$  KG\7
u
  	  \.`@\h  "
  Kh7u 
  @
' uGO 	 uG\7^Ku77@ 	  \..

`

n .x 
 #) 

 .x 

$   \h*un?
 '@ "
\uh5'@@\\^2\h

*,^2\

 Z  N".F$  Y
N".F$  
K-M\ 	  \h@ Z     %'  )

 n?huRGh7



   

A

8



	 h\h 	 





^u

	

fiUWfV XYZ$X[Y]\

_'@

 \h 	 
7@,hFh\h. ' 0

7{{\h

\h@7Q\{2h7}jhI

 .x$   N "#
  & Z  N"#
 

 "

j

T

	



 KO7O\`\h&\{`h,+.7 2K@\ 	 2

'@{\\\{ 	 ?B@\7@Q@@`\hhn?h7\ 	 u7
\7&GG\  ^G\hG\
 K\\.
  	 S 	 h`  
KO{7uuh`h@
; \\hGOh\ h7@\hGGu
\u\O\h
"G^7 \.7 	 2^hu.2\ 
{&uu`{u\O{h\  	 {
 K@\\,
 h
Oh\7h`h\.u{O7h
'  \7`

\` \u  M h7 N"
F  
  \{\h " $   N"
N"
  \
 Ou2\u&S
9 7 	
  
K F@$u \\\* 	 {Ku\h{\ 	 u
7.
 7 @
' u`\2 	 \uh3ff 7\uh
j  	
 ^\ *^2\ 	 u h\
 \
 
@G,\h\u`u2h 7fi
 
 jG
 I
 \hQ7 	
\u  @ !]%{
 h,
 ,
?   \h\\)
  \h*2
,
 
? u77O K 	 7  h\7h 
' O\O 	
h`\h`@j
   	
  $
  	 2^\ 	 *
h\h\
 Q7\`O 	 hu.2\ h{\7O@\h@\ K* 	 
  
`u.Oh7@
' `
 `h
 7{O@\hSh \Y{uh{h
\
 3@
' ^h2uu*^\
 ^7
F$   N"
  .O\hh`-&
' hF7
	 uG  N"
  
  n  
\u 
 u
@$`,
 {hY\h@\
 {\}
 )
 WB
? .G
u`WB
? \hF{Nff h@`hG{ ^
 772@
h$
 Q7( `^
 7
 Q u\{7 	 .u \u

\O 	




 #
 



 . 
 .x   #
  



 Y





J . 
 8 


 #
 
+  

 
@;:vu;:vuwFN	ffJfi&nz fiffnfi8yy'3}w)~nfi8{4

9

	 $hh;@ \.u7G\u
?B^ u
 	 u
\K\h 
' O\\uh
 hG
 
 `u{`K7u`O*uK7
\h&u\ 	 u\ 	 u`@ 	 2 \,
 \)
 {
 K\h\h\\
@\h d~\nF
 O\\uhOuu2Q\h@\u7O\6h6h
\)`{@\j:@
' 
 {2K\I
 } ^
\\hu O {K`u{` 	 7* 	 u\
 Oh` h`u\`O-@
' { G{hK\u\O@\j )( 
Oh7OK O{\  \7
  	 u \K\h 
 K
\{ 	 h7@u
  	 uhO`u`{* 	 u\B
 \{h{
?BQ7 	 uhGG@\h )( WB
? -
9 O\ @ \\uh{u7
7hu 	 u
 @`\\uh

u``uGGu\@7K7u{K$2 7

WfiFp

t8 WqZZ4} o

+=5,w:@R;x@GM?6@L"U9"03J;F<IK:\ @GM?;x;<G07:P2z:PK
 /5R21["6P2?X+="P9?UT1Hj/?<G032* W
 8RU032*<R@R;C69$:8K
W
 8R:82@GM?;R078M1@YM*682*9<G0791;, ;AM*68;>K :P/12*9@GM107<>;F<G07:P2@R:]O.:PR[<R:\];COM?6@n\]:8;>;F43076PT147H,

8 WqZv o

4L

M

8

fi Y\qp$X[\i\q

i7Y\rr{i7Y]

27hu\h

ff 	  	 u67hu\ \,.7
 @u@YW;;
 \
'@@\jhu.2\ @Y \,
 G\hOO{un
? Ou
`h\uO@\h 5@
' G@Fu^\FhI
 @@\h 
Kh7{ 	 u\@$\`h


\uhn? h7\\Q

@;:vu;:v9fi8y'qN	ffJ
{\6hO`@K.Q\

@hY2\h \\u`hn
? 
 
; .h 7 \@\j: ' G 	 u   	
\hu2h3T@\`\h`OQ @\j
\h.,
7j
? @
 h \,
 \77
  \
 J'@  u\ 
  
! r$
  	 7K\h7{
 @ \\ 2 7O@\h $;`Q \\
\,
  v%,T"{
 
 @u
 \O 	 6` ` 7\K\ \7
K\.u\u.u 	 *)
 
 &@h`7h6u\\ 
\ {\O 	 \u
; \77
 ^\
  	 uM{ 	  G\,
 
\
 6Gu`\h
 K\``u$j\hKG K
9 u`h\\Ou
\)
 \
 \
 {}^h7O\ 	 ,
  Y
 
@B*K\,
 `@7u^\$ 	 \u^\\\h@u\\
 &@

 \h\`h\\`@\h 


VnmLl

VBZ!vqrU ,b 46 >
V 0

$u\

9@\\\\+.7 ;  2 \hu
7uh)@\jh\`6\7\&G\\N"ff 677 O7\uS2\
 	 $\h$Gu. 	 u&
 
 {7FFu{26h{
 
HI7;huh7@\j$6\^`h\\
 \h\
 \ 
hn?@\h 	 u
 { uY
 \{Q 7`,
 {h$
  	 .uM
@\h
\hQ, 
' \u$
 `7O\
 \h
\hK\O*7 	 u
\@@\h{O `{\ 	 u7`
@`
; \\7u7 _  l\u\.  wn  w  ff 	 KK\h7

  @h\\`-B
? \hIu
 hI
  2\h .K,
 @`,
 
 
 ,
 . 
	 u 7h7" @\h   @
\`K\  	 u$* \\^{2@@\h `2 
 6 u9 	 6 I\,
 
\)
 \
 \
  7 \ h\\ \h
 hu\ \u
x   
! r`
 
 \h`h\\@\h @
 {2j ^h\
{`u
; \7\u7 _ _
 \u\`@\jS7(  	 
27@\{-B
? 7
   w 1fi wJfi w Gnn  fi .`7 2 C nfi
7  	
n wfi Gnn G  u\  	 $
 u\  
 @\jF
 {2\hGKh7$uG
u.^\7I@\hGQ  
! 76
 
 @h\O\G@\h 5@
' 
@\G\7`{K@`O\h@hh\\7uhI
 \hG`
7uO &\\hu > 1fi >Jfi
w Gnn x NI
 u2Q
\\
 7K7u{2h^5ff 	 -B
? \O`\un
? K$h\
K7&B
? \ `{$
 {hu   u\I
 
 K,
 
`O\``,
 @u 	 u @\j:
 \ 	 u O{7h


h@?B\h{hu\

\7 , , o{ 4z

F28z v 81

4 % 

[ ,y 

8 (z(1

C ,y 

]

8

( 

8 4z%1

K 4z &3

4 %

fiUWfV XYZ$X[Y]\

X

^_`abdcde_b

 . 

lg l, i fhgji,kl,m5gniporqtsvuwxDyzj{}|R~)R,)){}~)&wuR,}{

 ),&i,kvl vqtsvuwxDyzj{}|R~)R)),{
  {R>
,
_b^bd
 { zj{}|]
lg) l, i  i $q  ),,
 {    ),
 {sud|svuwxDyzj{}|
w,)w7{}|
 `d_ zj{  { zj{}|
  g)oig gi ]q zj{}~  ),~suwxyzj{|7
, {RR  {R
zj{
 {  )*  {  )&  l  rq zj{~  ,,
 {svud|   {sud|G  l  rq zj{}~)svuwxDyzj{}|"
bb
w)w7{|D
w,)w7{}|  l  rq zj{}~)svuwxDyzj{}|"
 `d_suwxyzj{ rlpg g vqtsvuwxDyzj{}|"
  svuwxyzj{  l  q  { zj{|R~)svuwxDyzj{|"
w)w7{|D
w,)w7{}|svuwxyzj{
 ):  {  )-i,kvl vq w,)w7{}|~)&wudR{T
svuwxDyzj{}|r  {sud|
e   w,)w7{}|
_bdde_d q , {RR

&"%$ t



"%$

 . +&  '

&"($
+ "($




C"%$


- ! !
  .



 . ,"%$
 . "($
 . "($
&"%$


$u\.  . 9S2.u 	 7uh){\h@]

Vnm

@tswuZ b4 0ZX 6 Wv-@ p 
W v a W 64 UFX

&`6 u\

\\`{&hF7{$`5Hff~u\`h

@2 	 Kh\` @
' K72$Qh\

`@h5ffIffRW\7h2

\G ff 
I 5 T\
 
; (3 `    \
 u
; 7(
     &HI7;hffIN>{OQu.\ \\
u{u\uh@``^"7jw>   	 u uuh\"{  \F
u`;h`^\\uu uh@&
  7\u`` 	
_   	 {h
 5@
'  	 
 {7 O@7n
? ^u.\\
u\u{hGu^hG{\ 	 u{ 	 {O\KG\ {uOhG 	
\2\7\   
9 6\
 O,
 .^27^`,
 
 
 
	 u O2hK`  {{ }^\YhY*)
{,
 .hGhuOOu&u\.7uB
? 5I
H 7h
; IffR5W
 5I&ff IffR
 h
 h
h&@\\h, 	 O{u`2K\\G`u\7`{\

 

{2O,
 *)
 uh7
 O\
  .\)
   7u@h\ \K
 7
u.OK
  	 hu 	 \77
 K\
 62\h6G,
 Q2 * 7\uG

   j @
' {K\
 {\hK`u* 	 u ff 
I 5 @u.\ BQ  u
I 5 p
 K Qh\\   u     F
 \O
   ff IffR O\^7=ff 
  ff 
I 5 O` 	 u\hYu\u 	 K\\h 	 u7\.
? \hF7 	 \7  
B
u\\h 	 @
 

   

IffRNZNI



+

}



?

 

fi Y\qp$X[\i\q

i7Y\rr{i7Y]

KRK (0%): Test Accuracy

KRK (0%): Train Time

% Correct

Seconds
I-RIP
WIN-RIP-3.1
WIN-RIP-95
WIN-RIP-NT-0.0

100.00
99.80
99.60

I-RIP
WIN-RIP-3.1
WIN-RIP-95
WIN-RIP-NT-0.0

28.00
26.00
24.00

99.40
99.20

22.00

99.00
98.80

20.00

98.60

18.00

98.40
98.20

16.00

98.00

14.00

97.80
12.00

97.60
97.40

10.00

97.20
8.00

97.00
96.80

6.00

96.60

4.00

96.40

2.00

96.20
96.00

0.00

95.80

Train Exs x 103
0.00

2.00

4.00

6.00

8.00

Train Exs x 103
0.00

10.00

2.00

4.00

$u\  . IG 	 GO2 	 &I

6.00

8.00

10.00

\h

9{u\ffIffRGQ\\ @\h@ \\ 	 $u\.  '@^hh
 	 h 
 ',< 9KhG`2hu 	 \2 hu.2\`
`,
 h\ 7`*,\^\\ Oh6\7\u ]7_
 Q7\\\
 { 	 hu\`{2fi&I uh, \uh@ h

 O 	 n
? h6&9 $ 	 Y} `\h*uY}M 	 
h$*\h*`h@K\u h7$\5ff h{ 	 G
 *`7$\\
2u
  \u.{^
 h.Ou  \n .\ { 	 \7
 	 h\
 h\ h\  u\h2 	  \ 
j
  \ `Qh\`Ohu.\O7hY\`\ 	 \
 O\Q\ 
^h\\
 \7O@`Gu\{u7@
; \\)( 
 	 2{@\j  	 ^@\{ 	  2K\.@\h *
 {u _7 _  h
; 
27KO 	 &
9 6 u\`GQ\u \h$ 7I
 \K`Q\u
jhu. 	 .u  	 h\hff IffR \ \u { 	 O2hh
9$\
 \.hK*jSGu22Q2`Q\`7 	 !]TTr<
  Q  
! 7    K\ 	 u`GY`2 	 .Q @
 `\
 Q
h\Oh`j
 h\hK\\u\h7 	 @\u 
 7
$
 G`h`h 
; \.Q2\h@2 	 7   j  	 2 G
hu\
K\ 	 u^h\G6
 \ Q227h(  u 	
 C nfi
n wfi n G hu.2\ \ KKd
 72 	 `\uh
$u\  h@IG\ 	 u6 	 ff Iff G
O"\ 6@\h@ 7 ff IffR
 
u   G
^7uh)
 $\h@O&ff Iff  
  G
672
  j @
W
 u  	 7uh)
 @\h@@7^ 	
' O\{`
`2Ou\  	 $
 u\ 	 u&&I \uh\
 
 \hff IffR
 ,
 7h( 
hu\h\
 \h62Kh\h
 6 G\
 h  } G
Q\ 	 u7`
Gu`\ 
]$
 \O6\2\u @\h@]9 7

-1 43.3.

\



_ 4z 8q8z v 81
1 43.3#>8@

4 %



1 43.3#9;:<

1 43.3#>8@

8

`1 43.3

`1 43.3.\)3#;:v
 8
X1 43.3.3#;:v

+8',wX1:8KE=:P/1<R;X*<R@R682*91<K :Pw>:807<R;Fff:P47;F6821@=,nDJ;=EF07684@GM*6825[1<w@R:]@GM*;A;=07;=O.;FwOM?:]<G/?;=<R@R;=9@GM107<2?:@R6@G07:82,

?

 

fiUWfV XYZ$X[Y]\

KRK (5%): Test Accuracy

KRK (5%): Train Time

% Correct

Seconds
I-RIP
Win-RIP-3.1
WIN-RIP-NT-0.0

100.00
99.50

I-RIP
Win-RIP-3.1
WIN-RIP-NT-0.0

340.00
320.00
300.00

99.00

280.00

98.50

260.00

98.00

240.00

97.50

220.00
200.00

97.00

180.00
96.50
160.00
96.00

140.00

95.50

120.00

95.00

100.00

94.50

80.00

94.00

60.00
40.00

93.50

20.00
93.00
0.00
Train Exs x 103

92.50
0.00

2.00

4.00

6.00

8.00

10.00

Train Exs x 103
0.00

2.00

4.00

6.00

8.00

10.00

$u\  .IG 	 O2 	 {@\h@.u 	 u&*&IS\u 2J}
? 

u\

	 u d%%



    ~G{
\^`K\hu\GKh\ B\ 	 u7`

\hhK\u{Gu;W\
 ;(^

u\{\h&@\&{hu\
h7u\^G2 	  O\uh

`1 43

$u\. 
  h@`\ 	 u^ 	 \. 	 hu\`G\ ` G
 h G@J}
.n? ffIff{ 	  @hu.2\

	 u
\hG.u; Q*uO@^hu]9uu O`u`\h76 	
\
 u )
 {@\h@^@ G
  .h\\\ h\7
@7
 h\\{hF
 K{@\hShG O\
 {\7 u 7_  
' ^7u6

  	 u\
 K\h\\\ 	 Gh
\`
K\\\\ 2u\\h{@h2J
' 2

 G
\
 \ 	 u7`  	 
 *`7^@Cj
 .u h
 j
 h 	 u
\`I
 {\`\h7 B
? \`\h{hu\ 
 .)
  	 
,\`7@
' :B
? 7K`{2\hK2OO 
 7. u\G
Rj
 h2Q\`` 	 `hu\
' O@\7\\uj
 h{ 	
@$; K@h7 	 uG\`h\\`WB
? \hF2u5@
' 
 Oh\ @7h
; 
`\hy
 {2Q\Y
 Ghu. u* \\)
 
h\ OONj
 hG 	  @
'   u 	 uF2Y2\hYhG Rj
 h6*@`u.$
2u@u\h^ 	 Oh7 K
9 h\
 G\{\
 h@ 	 h
\h@u
 h{{7h
j
; h`@{h\hO7{7u= _  
'  	 

 \hKGu*Q7B
? 
 O 7uh  	 u@2
,\` 	 uK
G
u* 	 u`
`7`Y 	 \`GKKhhQ*u$62`
\ 	 u7`7` 	 h\7hW
 u
 $
 u\  _h@Q27O 	 ff IffR 
  `
G
S@`7^ 	
 &I \uh@y_  }Qh\\N
 &
\ 	 u7
\@O2`{7`@ 	 h\hI
 \@.OK7u`{uh` 	 7\`

3#>8@

C1 43.3.3#;:v












1 43.3.\)3 
1 43.3.\





fU3.




=

?

 1



fi Y\qp$X[\i\q

i7Y\rr{i7Y]

KRK (20%): Test Accuracy

KRK (20%): Train Time

% Correct

Seconds
I-RIP
WIN-RIP-NT-0.5

100.00

I-RIP
WIN-RIP-NT-0.5

90.00
85.00

99.00

80.00
98.00

75.00
70.00

97.00

65.00
96.00

60.00
55.00

95.00

50.00
94.00

45.00
40.00

93.00

35.00
92.00
30.00
91.00

25.00
20.00

90.00

15.00
89.00

10.00

88.00

5.00
0.00

87.00

Train Exs x 103
0.00

2.00

4.00

6.00

8.00

Train Exs x 103
0.00

10.00

1 43.3.

$u\  _.IG` 	 G
_  } .n? Y

27

	

2.00




4.00

6.00

8.00

10.00

8

  	 ufi&I

\uh

@

92uu^h;   72 	 \uhG \nF
uh@ 	 \u.Wff Iff O7\``uh@ 	 h@hQ7K)(I
G
 @u.j 	 \u\*G\\]K 	 u\\ \O\ 	 u7
 	 ^ u\
7``\)
 ^ 	
 \h \O

 ^
 Bu`hu 	 u6  	 u
 '/ $
 u\  h@6u\ 	 u$2\K\nF
 
7{ 	 
,\` 	 uj
 .u
  	 ff 7`K 	 \`F
 {O
 u
  
\h@u-h
 hK 	
\OhG 7\`5ff `G 	  \h
 `G*
uuN
 @hG
  	 uG\
 I
 h{`
 Y 	 } :
 u @
  j {\ 	 7Ku\\ 	 u`*\`u`
 
 
 hh\`6\`@\u)
 Q\
 \7
 
 \$G@
	 \.hQG
h
 O\7\ u 27K` 	  \h-B
 .u {`\
 \`
Gu\2\h^2` *u`uhu*,G uh  	 
,\`7@O2
 $ {h
 ^\
 h7 G
u \)
( Z
 _}h7 
 7 	 {   _
\
 {\7h@h2\h
 K {h
 ^\.
 `7 `& 	 *\
 \
` h\7h@2@\h@  u\` 
' \
 \`\7
\
 u` 
; T\
 
; (    !
 h 
 F
 h 
 *`hG\h`\uh
\
 G 
;  	 *\
 u$h$W
 p)
 \uh
 2j{$
 u\  h
  7
 
 
uG 	 
u7\ 	 ufiff Iff
 7`6 	 h\7h`K7
u`2K`uh
 K{ \{
 7^KQ`{,+ u{h5
I \
`{u Gu\{u
 ^*h hG
 
 2O@u\O\h
\`\ff u\ GG{\u Ku\@ &IS
 \u  @

1 43.3.\



+












j1 43.3.\

1 43.3.

[

+=5,  26W2?;=O 95:\]6P032XJOY;AOY:8/547969507E=;Z@R:]@GH

# G   G
 032@GM?6@n:P91;F8,

 + ]6P2?9

?

 

8

fiUWfV XYZ$X[Y]\

KRK (10,000): Noise vs. Accuracy

KRK (10,000): Noise vs. Run-time

Accuracy

Run-time
460.00

I-RIP
WIN-RIP-NT-0.25
WIN-RIP-NT-0.5
WIN-RIP-NT-1.0

100.00

99.50

I-RIP
WIN-RIP-NT-0.25
WIN-RIP-NT-0.5
WIN-RIP-NT-1.0

440.00
420.00
400.00
380.00

99.00

360.00
340.00

98.50

320.00
300.00

98.00

280.00
260.00

97.50

240.00
220.00

97.00

200.00
180.00

96.50

160.00
140.00
120.00

96.00

100.00
80.00

95.50

60.00
40.00

95.00

20.00
Noise Level
10.00

20.00

30.00

40.00

Noise Level
10.00

50.00

20.00

30.00

1 43.3. 

40.00

50.00

8 8 = 8 

  _    j	 u&
$u\  .IG 	 ffIffR\&uG 	 

    \&&IS\h@h^ 	 n?hY

7j?h 

7QO\.\7

	 uGOh\K* 	 u{hGu \

`{\u7h{\`K*Q\ 	 u
 7`

ff\GQ\O\7K \*\\u

	 u@\j

hu.2\`Q\ uO2\hF\G\h@\u`6\&K\@h\.Ou\K 
@\h@\uh\h2j\h@\.^\

	 u
@\\$$ 	 h$\7{h 7\`@uh$@$hn?Qh\7h
jGh \Q6h \h&@2\ \&@u B^K
 
\h@*{O*uh^u{u\@7

$

h

Fk

\j\hh6O7.hO


?  	 h
HI7$\\\]Ih)]I\\ 	 u&u7
^  	 h\@2\6u-ff 67u
  @F\\Gu` 	 {h
\
 u\nF
 OQ  	  	 h@uF
 2.h\{}
h2@OGu
; !&\ =
H    

anmGo

o

 
X rz&ZBVYX 4 a
a  BW0Qu>v 4 .

~

 u@\\7

@\h@] 
 u$\u.

Z\[
\\uhG\h@{\hu.2\`G\jF

	 u

h\`6@\h@\\u*Q7K\\\`\

h$h`u\`u\7{\`Guh\7>'@G\O\h6*\h\u\
\Q{jh\hQGO t6

    ff"   	 \\u  h { ;u
vd}p%)"!  h77  _  $K^7u\h\u\. 	 u\
`\h\\\u`h.\7K2\\ 	  \hu

?

 "

fi Y\qp$X[\i\q

u\

i7Y\rr{i7Y]

HF   \ \nF\\h \h)\\\
 5H  h
U
 \\O7\u`77O`@\h \6*h
hu  	 2{^\}
 "h\7h^,
 &@\h )(   \u{u\u`un?
uh 	  	 \.@.`K 	 O@\h ff K 	 \`I
 2QK\h
\\O  Bhd^
  	 uG`hF7hu.2\`
-d"T%!]T!\
 \\{
 u`Q      
 7K
 O\hh
` 	 \ Y)
( u`{27{7 h\.u&@
' K\\h
^\`Q$7Q\hu
 \6\ $\h`\h7`h\h
u,7\uhZ
 &\
 {\`@7*O u.`*n
? Oh
u.2\S6\{7O{@\$u\` 	 K7h\` t{
 u`    
~\\2\\{\ K* 	 \ 	 u&.h{h\h
 	 h7n
? @
' Q\ O\Khhn
? {``\2{ 	 Oh2
u``\\u$
 \h
 ]I
 ~\\\h{\ %"!  .
 K@hu\
 G62\@\\h\u\\
  %%%,"!^
 TO
 h
; 
   }
~\5 ~  B
 \3 ~\ 
 7 
; jh= T!  .
K@\
 &\h6\
 @\`hn
? ^\
 u67hu @`uG7h
; 
  
\77^
 {huff .w
 G    \hO\ {
\{u\`\h{.\
 KOG{u+ \{\ @O\7@\ 	 u7
 	 @\h@@hu.2\````u, 7    
  
h 	 { 	 `Gu
; @{\,
 O2 \h 	 )
 h\I
 
Gu\{`j
 h\h7O\h^*u\{hu`@\``
`` \`h{Gt
 u{\
 A
 G     \7 hu.2\`
	 uGh GK{```u.\OO 	 \2]
ff fi{
 h@\&{
 ,
 . 	 uNO
 h\hh
 \2^\\
  *
 7h
  	   u 
' )
 uS  \\7hu 	 u@
	 u2\,
\u 
 Kh7uh7 7\,
  	 u \ 	   2
  \{h
j
; uu h
 )
  
 \
 Q2uh$\u\\
 ,u
 `\ 7uO\.u\}
	 u{)( ^\ O 	 u{22@ )
  2K7 	 h7uh7Q
 )u
 J
 \    u 	 \u\hF\*\

 )
  
 \    \ K\
  *\7
  	 .u {


\h

N

N

anmL

B 64qp Z

2 ZuW b X 4 XYr

? 	 J")dd!]T! 9u\
GhY\h\\d?Bu @`N? 	 hWI
H   h)GO\
 	 M 	  ^7\u
\hu`u26,
 2\\
 Gu
  u\9hpJHFh     {G\dB
? uGu\{\uhuu
\{@\j`\u2\GGu{
;  .O\h6``u2h`
 	  %p 5pT\7u)uQ`K2{ n
? hu
 	 K 	 7KhKO  	 \.
 \^@:?]
 @ 	 *h2
~\\\u O.\ u `7h hu 	 u\\\
 \\72{\O`7h
 hu72 ff u \*  .
\j\O.Qh7h





j

@tswuZXF[ 4qp Z 2 W  Zv 4 XYr>8ffO\h&N*)K7{uh\2h7n?h
 GK\*  jh~\\

?


fiUWfV XYZ$X[Y]\

\



7)

\u

\h@\{*O\



	 u7u

``)(

\`\

	

u\G``h7 	 u

'\hh 	 \u ` \K\,\^
 67uGhu)(hu\u`W@hGun?@dFu&
	 7h\h 	 
\hu {hK`7Q\h5@
 @\\F
 ` 	 2Q
Gu`
; h)
 O7\h@7hu
 @h7u)( hu\.u`
! T!]R #<r)T!
 I
H @ O     I
H @=
  h 7@\h@yp
'  \nF
 @$\ FG@\h6$h,+ `u{2 \ $ 	 `hn
? 
 h77    
\
 
 \GuO\hG 	 2K @u
? \{GhK\\u-@
' 
 
\h`h7n
? @2h`u
? \@@\h\\7^2h 7O2
 
h7" 	 Gu Gh\  
hG F
 Oh& u\``^7hh\h 7h{2
\\uU
 67\Y
 \ 7h 	  ` hu.2\ }*
\u QuOh  \ h7    -@
' u
   @7`u`
 	 hn
? O`h\.{Q\2h`\\uO^\u 	 \ u`
`^`h7j
? . @
' ) ":<r)T!
 \\^\u*  u\ Oh6
     
u \\
 K \ uuh 	 `Gu`
; \ KO 
 u
\h 	 u7u{h{`u`7-9 2
 .u 	 2{\\h { 5p #
%"#j%T
 h\ R~\$w
 {\\G ~u*
;   _  I
 \A
 ~\]A
 ~\\` 
'   
G
 K\u\ \.\7 ,
 \\2^7\u7
G * 	 u`h 	 u M\
  ff 	 \\u\nF
 G
 
hu.2\ h
;  	 u\ 	 2@
  h\\&&O2@h`N
 5%T
%,<d#r)"!
 TO
 hu3 67u      hu 	 \\u\
hn
? fiI
H  
' h\\hO  u\`
  $ }{ 	 Q\\u
 	 `u7{ 	  \hG,\h7u`
 @hu)( hu ;
{ {
 \,
 2,u \\.uhh \\ \huK
 `\ 	 *h2j
  F9  
 7hu 	 22 	 
\ 	 u  d^
   	 7 h\` u\uu\
u 	 \.u
O 	  	 u 	 2\Gu;$

 hG
 I
 O\\ {
\6. @G\u  	 & 	 uG&\7u:  
\OGuuu.O{h\{\{\\.u
lff $ &uu
 u&\h$@\h@`\\@`uGhQ*K 	 K\ 	 
`\{ 	 \\h2

 hG
 I
 
 7huO\
 7 7
 7h
\\ @
    	 2\\` \\u\ ^  `7\2h
*u` h 	 {\]G
 `uu`u* 2\\u
^`7Q.h\ h\
 7 &
 u\h\ 2 	 
u7` 	  	 uU% }}"!$"! R&\
 
 7  u\`\hu
 \
 \2hu
 ,
 `)( huR   hu\ 
 u
   h\@
' \\]    
\^u\@ )
 K7\\^T
    \  
 u  ff 	 
{\.uO\ 	 \.
 u\`\ 	 *\
 Oj
 h7
hu.2\
`uO*u h{2Q\
 \7 	 7u`Ou7\
 
 2@\h@hu\`}\u\ \\.u\h 	 u`

h
\\





'



?


fi Y\qp$X[\i\q

i7Y\rr{i7Y]

v 
n
"{R#&7ig!,gj,gkpp
,glirq,&p
``^
,


 {R2>,
,dqqv, z  {RR) ~&xp ~ r" {R#&p 
  lgnipo  
 g, . g)lirq  ~&] ~r" {#n
,

^_`abdcde_b fhgji,kl,m5gniporq z   x ~ 

_bdde_dvq
bb
r{R 

{R

" #& i,k]kp
g)liq  ~ &]~"{R#&p

$u\.  ].9

anmLl rOU0

u>vZs 46d1 Zff
a

hu


	 @\h@]

B 64 UFX

\j`\&GhG*hIh

	 {@\-h 	 u`)(hu7\\@\h
K.6&uu{ 	 GO\u \7 	 `\\u\. $j uu
7^ 	 2 \uJ'@u  	   \u `7\*\u 
\Q* 	  \^)
(  	 2^ \\7\h ',9 $
 u\  
h@ h7 	 @\h@ hu\lff ^2^h
(  2 7
\u
@\u
 ]F
 @ \ 	 
   
 
\7h\
 \.u
\h
( Q2^u
@*u.\  \h 7u`7u\u*j
? \h
\\h 	 Ohh\2^
 ^ ]7\
  	 
 uOu\ 	 u\u
uh  $
  \ @K\
 \\ u*uhu
 	 hu ]7\
 h\\hY`h7j
?  
    ` u@
 \h7h 	 `Gu

; h\7\\\.uh 	 u
u
 , 	 {^\hu
 2h \\7G\  7 K
9 @
 ;
 	 hu\
2\h@h76`O2u*@\ WB
? @u
@F`u$uO
 \\7\h 	 26F{&6\ 6O\  	  u
F\
 u
 d!]J
# T %pG ]-%p}"!O
 \,
 \ 7u`G
 6uu,
 
`u
 , 	 2\\{\h
 K`uO\.@ h7
 	 h)
(  \h@hu\h ~\ \\u \h 	  ^\h)( 
' T{
 
I h\  G\u  
 K\h{\\dB
? K 	 *O2\h
 HffM
@h7u
 B
 {{7@7^``u{\
 \)
 `\\K\h
 	 @KK{:B
?  h7 	 h7u@\7G2\hZ
 ~`K\\uh
u^h`\Gh 	 ffRH
 hu\
 u\
 
 !>wG^l{  }
 u
u`h7 j
 {h`\`F2\hYB6u
 ` 	  \\7
\hI
 7h
; `\Q* 	 j
 O\h\ 2Q\\ 	 `u
{,
 Q\  	 \
 u\&`\dB
? {hu
 *@\ 
' {\u\.Ou *Q7uh)( `@}`{u{\7\
@
 u\
 Y
u\    >
' OhY* h 7Qd
 h
 h\h\hK^\.u\`h\





_

+8',  2;D5;=<R;21@R6@G07:P2!47682*8/*6;=<@GM?6@S;=B"@R;F2?9 ?6@WKL;C6@G/1;N;CE=@R:P<=X.<G/*ERM!6<W5<R@G:895;F47:P07EXn@GM?;E=:\ZD547;=B07@H
:8Kn6N47;=6PR21032? D1:PT147;=\ 6847<R:U91;FDJ;2*91<WER/*EF07684347Hx:82d@GM?;6P;F6;E=:<R@A:8K>\S6@RERM5032?6P2d032?<R@R6P2?E=;O07@GM 6tR/147;,
";FT?6]682*9 n:8/*;F03:P4.R+=^91;=\]:82*<R@G6@R;>6Z@R;=ERM52107/*;>K :P;=9'/?EF032?]@GM?;=<R;DJ:@R;F21@G076P4347H;=BDJ:82*;F21@G07684ffE=:<R@R<Y076
<G/1T5<R6\WD543032?5,

E

?A


fiUWfV XYZ$X[Y]\

Q2 	 
 `OOuGu^*G\h ff `K\\u\ B "&%d
\\h$7

	

}#<)"%!
	$	 h2\

h2\G\677uhu\`&\hG@\&\$

 \:u
 G
	 h\.OhK``{7^h@ 		 h\*
	 `Gu;  \\JIh]    u\ u\  
9 F 	 2O\,2,`u\\uhK}^*&uG  K`\,\\{ 	 %",Wp &

u*hu{R  \ u\& {u\   	 u7u 	 7K`u\hu\h
`u.6\
 \)
 G)
 KhG
' \^  
 uh$``u$\ 
 \Y
\h
 u\,
 `)(  \h
u{.@@`G
; h uh\h
 	 {^7uh
 {\{27{`u\*`  	 d^
 {h
uN@
' K@u77@@ u\ 	 u@.^\h
; @. 	 h\{2\
u
 u\
  u\  
 *
 2\h`
;   	 7`Gu
; } h7 `u.^7h \\.uh 	 u
 2u
 , 	   \.u
 Kh h \2 \\7
\
 2\hh`^`
9 ^\
 u\vd}
 p%)"!
 7\\
2u  h@    
 6\2O6O7 `\ K\\\u7
\hu\u 	 
O*\h
h\\u

i



N

i
_N

x

  

 &

Fk

'@7h6@}u`h 	 \Gu;\\h7u \   .
\*
 u u 	 2dFO 	 \`7{7O 	 u\hu\`\
ff\7
 \7Q\\.\ 	 
,\{ 7\\\
Q2 	 {\hh6\hu` 	 h\
9 7\h)
 u  	 u
{\.Q\u`u  u=7 _u h\
 7uh\
 2uK\\{
`\h2 	 O2\7`hK
9 \7  u   ]F
 \ 	
@\h@Qh\`67 \*\GuK\ 	 `@\`G7h
J@
' K
 *`\ 	 u\7h)(  \\uh. @\u
' d^
  	 \hu\`u }\\\ 	 \.
	 u 	 \7
\,
 `* )( `,
 7hF\
 h 	 7..`,u
 ` 	 u
{\.@2uuuO
 @@\h@^7hu:B
?  \5"ff \h
 u`u\u@7*Q 	 F2u
 
	 u u
 `u\@,+ u u@h\`u7h{2\hK7j
? h{\``
\Y
 O`uO\\` 	 \.
 7uh`` 	 @\j7\\ 	 u
h\\)
 h\7hu 	 {hdF
 )
 7 	 u{@`
``Q7u\
  	 u7`$\u
 \\ 	 uu`Q2 .6 	 `7
\ 	 @\h@@\nF
 Q\M\$
 h{`  ]j
 l{  
`G`\hQ*u7Q7\\Ku\`@
 u
`\ 	 `u2hu
  `\
  	 u\\h@72 	 `\uh
\}
  	 $ u\`\& 	 \
 @\\7^7Q2@^hu.2\`WBh@h
\O  }h  \hO @
' {`@\jhu\O
h\h 7`u\ 7hu\``\
  	 uh\O\h
7 	 u@*Q* 	 `u\;$Z
 jG
 
 `u\G\`h\
K 	 @\h@@  h

 \u \)
  2u

 \
 `u*u\=
9 
 7hu 	 Guh\
@\7u 	 u 	 \2@.



?M


fi Y\qp$X[\i\q

i7Y\rr{i7Y]

 \Y2^\, 	 \Ohu.2\`O`7 \\u\ _j \u
9 hu 	 u@`hu`Qh\u`@\O\ 	 u7`^ @}u
  ;=
&G  
9 - $
 ,((   {
   G
;      9 \nF`
\u ``u h$@hu\ 	 u7u\@Gh$  N
 _  ;: @
 
 uG\
 
 OuQ\h7{@\j\.u 	 uGhI
 \ @
  
O2\hO2)
 h\\:B
? \h&u\ 	 \jF
 Oh7
 {.h
\h$
 u
 7 	 \h@ 	 uB
? .u\7\Q2\h
@\ ;]:@
 7Q2\hK2Q2\\u )
 ^\`
^\ \.\`\ 	 u\\u\ @] 
 u`\
 NB
? 7u\`7
` 	  hSQ\dB
? u 	 h\
 ^T
 u    uG7
 \
 u
; ` 	 u  	 Gu.  \u l{
	 u *)
 K\
 62@  	 u@.Q@ 	 2\]NB
 \7`uh
 
 
 h
7h7 	 uffRH
 u\`\*uh 
 u`\
 G
  
\7
 {u@ 	 \h  Ih7@ 	 . \\h7{\h  7
\)j
 hu 	 `\)
 {\
 O.K\G2K7hh
 Q\.u\
@7h
; 7`\O 	 \2]
`

$

f^

 ffh&j 

ff O\\GO\Q\.7 2hh\hu 	 uG\h@@\ 2,u\
 hu\
 u,\\ 	 hu.2\Gun?uh^u\2hu\h
d^
  Q*`@u{` ` 	 \\)h\h&h@
 	 h\h\h72,u\{Q7 u\`h`\\\
K Oh7\`\)
 \2,u\7`  u\@
\`\@ 	 h7\h@.O\ O\2O\h2{h2\Z
 Ghu 
?B\]
  `\
  	 \.G\`u7h`uN
 `\ 	 uGuh7@\j
7 hu\ {u7`\h7h\\ B
? \h62u
,
 \
 ^`,
  	 u 2@\j:@
' ^
 \227
h$\\Oh7{ 	 `@\h@ \.u `u
 , 	 
\u
  ^@ 	 u\O\
 O*h2 	 `\u 
 G
\
 \h62K\` 	 u7h)
 @@\h@\{h)(  	 u6h7h
; O2 \
 	 7O@\h@]5
' \  *
  O\
 u\{\hQ\.u`@\h\
 K*
)
 9JB
? @`hu  	 hu 	 u@uO\.u` \ Kh
 
\u7`\uh @n
? h$

C

Jk  



hR  

  

'@^7\u7u 9{.u\(\ u \\\`\ 	 
u\T$
   \\Gu6\Q*    ffR R~\ \C~7*\  ffGu ; 
\y
; @. $
; &uh
; 6
   u 'u  Z&\\3 	 \ 
~\h]K
9 2@~\.)h
 h
\{
 u`u
 G 	 2
\
 u&
 u 	 `\\ 	 u 	 $u
 \u` *7{^h
 
h\.
' \
; .h @
I } 
 u 	 u`
;   u` HFff ~
 h
H 7\j
I
  `Oh .@ 	   ffN
 h H .\

f

4

\

?]


fiUWfV XYZ$X[Y]\



  

&

937$,((3 ]Y  n )  I-9.9 27 h7\hIuK7
hu\ff QG,+ I& $  >-}%1dd#T!%=&fiGp
G v%T!]!$d!]T%!]Z5%!"&

! dW%!
 S"d!]T)j!  Y

 h\      \Q ,B7,uu
  	 \
{

`

&\]9]H ]



]



P K


 q 



4

HFrY  >~u 	 . h 	 h\\h
 S"$!$T)j!d _,p _  >~\\h5fflOj( )!



2=



&\9H 7 '&    u`\\\h@`h2h]
ff  }%1dd#T!%& Gp
,G &!]!p 5%!"&}!d %!5%.T%!] dd!]T!  p%#
8 A
,



h

\









\


ff9   ffu`]


+ 

 FP

)

GH     
 9{h7j?.'B  Y~h&{\.`.)
 	G h 	 u^ &;h





G]H    >Gh^\\]J"pT!] d!$"!p

_

   _ 



   

GH      $  7 2 	 u\\u  .   
u\\\2 @jh 	 u

 b ?  Sb.  ]b8 
 1 ffff  
*


5

n

1



w

b
A
b
$



 [&  R
+  Q4
Q;R P=R& 2 ' ;
 R
;R H
GH 7I&]
 J:7I&p~      >5),d ]T%!!]#U( p}d"%!
dIh\7 |Gp;v$ j?kO
 ,  9
 \h.\7{uff  u* ]@2.:
 7\\]I&]Ih]Y    X
R$\  Y }%5d#"!%=&Gp-+,
 G=d!]d!]"%!$A5%!"&}!:%!y "pT!]kdd!]T!F
.  \Y_    pG\;$r] ufi{ 	 \
 6    Wuhu.W9 7N:ffQ&\\H 7  X $R\  
 h772$
 }%1dd#T! %&=GpK G3!]!$T%!]
 %Pp%d %! "pT!] !$"!zRq+  6\
  v
   j7uffRH $uufi{ 	 \
 @    j pT!]#JT%!4x
 "pT!]- d!$"! %!i] # Tp*%,6
 h77F]
Gh7-{\G

2

	5 u\7~nK)7 	 ~u

P

 %
 h77 $6  _  \].  uh\d^ 	 u`uhuff d#"! %=& Gp ,G !$d!]T%!$5%!"&}!d5%!dJ""!$ d!]T!dR
 \  v,$
 u{ 	 \

)



q+



 ;$57  &G I&@  I@u@  _.x~u`\,`
ff -}%1dd#T!%=&=Gp ,G  }%dvd!
%PT!rT%! %! d!$"!z  
 G\
 ]
 uu tff~\\, $h]
    p

t



0
U



 2F+

-

F

 G' 6  '@  N_uhu.2\!J"pT!] dd!]T!p $T  
 ;$>7 
_  _  



 uY    -Bhd 77`u&ff&\797r I@w~$R\  
 }1% dd#T!%=& G p G=!$d!]T%!$>5%!"&}!d&%!y "pT!] !$"!
 \\
H h
;  '
 u  9ufi{ 	 \
   _  p




P



?

 

F+

fi Y\qp$X[\i\q

i7Y\rr{i7Y]

H hI&B    ]ff\.`h)(hu@h)@]
 u\979hpH7p 
J 'p"!$ d!$"!p Y_  _  _J_  



4+



Ohurff7 6u>~      `2,\h7 2 	 u@2h \u\
 n
?  ff&\97 I@7tY~FR$\  ff-}%1dd#T!%=& G G!$d!]T%!]
5%"! &}
! dfi%!
J'pT!] !$"!zR
 \       >HF; ='Y  9uu
  	 \
{

-

q+

`



{Ih\H 7 |G\u3   ff \.Qj^ h{)u
]  !$%-)# N 17"T%!$     



 #

;




c{u.\uW5OR\  {    |~\*hOuhhh\hu 
\ dd!]T!p $   _  
{'&5  ; K    ~) Qh \u`u
u\@\
 %Jpd!]>%=&  S "$!$T)j!dN( <d="; _  ff _  
\ u\&37

uJ""!$

{u`>    wG^\n?2hh$Ouff!~`\n7
] R\   }%1dd#T! %=&fiGp !]# !$d!]T%!$]5%!'&<!d%!  !$%-d#I&7"d%#
!]
# *x

T!]T!  N   \   __,99W9&ff &









{u`>F    n\uO2\ \2\n?2h7hY{u5ff
 }1% dd#T!%=&fiG
  %8p%< %!d!]p}T!j r) !$#
%#n<\
_   $

)  



-

O;h* ?~\I&*7,~u  J&{\ 	 u6`\huGu;
!]!$"%!] v%Jd!]-%=&!-d!(-d%!]T"%!3!]# &d ST!]")np! IT    
 _  



 

B}uh:$r



ff.W$   _  {Q\\ 	 u7uRhh
\72{h7]

J 'pT!] dd!]T!p   








 \

B.\ ) 7z~\pI&*  ?*`Y2Q *u7 h\pffd~\h
H YR   }%1dd#T!%=& Gp G!$d!]T%!]wN%!"&}!&%! J""!$ dd!]T!p\
      G.t$ff"hu.u{ 	 \

-



\

B.\ ) 7>~\]A >~7w~\\ 
 7> 'G :6  I~)
^u`Ohu.2\] "pT!] !$"!p    



f

2



\
 ;( ]K    {u\h,u  ffRH. 9Mh@7` ff3{=I@ \
H 7> uA~ R\   }%1dd#T!%=&Gp Y

%Pp%d %!D}%!$"%=&
!]J
# T %pG-}%p}T!p\   phhu u\





 q =t
&



\
 ;( ]B    $
 {j\@\,`Gh\ .9 7Q\.u\2h'F

  9&ff'I& 
    9 7IG ff72 	 uN9 .n? Gff

)

e.

^

\
 ;( ]O    Jud^@\h@] ff -}%1dd#T!=%&G
G
"%!]
5%"! &}!d&%! & S"]d!]T)j!d
&
 \]    ]&,u\Iff9W9W9*ff
 \
 
6

C 

o)) 8
?

 



fiUWfV XYZ$X[Y]\

8

-+

\
 ;( $Y     @72K\h@]-ff  }%1dd#T!%=& G p ,G!$d!]T%!]
v%T!]N5%!"&}!:%! &d ]T!$T)j!d  Y

  hu u\
 \\  J_    K
 u{
  	 \



 

 q 8




f





[2IR_  

"pT!] Ddd!]T!

\
 ;( ]K    6\hu\ 	 u`]
  



8

q  S "d!]T)j!](-"

\
 ;( ]B  ~\h2,uG]
\





rff

\
 ;( ]  `
K    ff *IG 6fi&\] ff  u
 
 :BR\  
  }%1dd#T! %=&&Gp ,G !]!$"%!]5%!"&}!d%!xJ""!$
Ddd!]T! 
 \ 
 \
   G\@;] $uu{ 	 \



F.

+



[

OQ*7HF\ p:Y    u\u 	 u] K,(uG\ 7
`\h7ffjQ~u`37
`q 6R$\  > }%5d#"! %=&fiGJ,G  
%<vd! 5%!"&}!d=%! "pT!]Kdd!]T!   F8  G\    _   &hu  (
IG\\n~\\.U$
 h]
I&-9K;hH  W{    u^7 2 \u  	 2h
\ +.\
ff-}%1dd#T!=%& Gp
,G!$d!]T%!] v%"!$N%!"&}!%! & S"
!]")np! d  . &
u

\





  ,{.ffuu{ 	 \

u\fw:7

 F Zn



+



 

H 5    ~2h2Q\\\` 	 u{ `$ ff
F
~u\A7  ] $\  n-%5dd#"! %=&Gp !]#d!]d!]"%!$W5%!"&}!d%!
 &^ d% # !]#x&x T!]T!y  N   \   9W99&ff-67
 !]%-)#p

4

)

C

)



)u ]7N \:K    3'@\hG` 	  ;h@\\,. ff
 }%1dd#T!%=& Gp G dA ]
  dN R$] ] R$ (.#,v%,Gp %! -T!
=% &* %<Y
 #< I]W
 \\   

P 



2'

 F

)





)u ]7 \:O    J9 \
 \,h\*\
>pd%}G>5%Yp&."!d
    _     



4.2

8





	 .

	 u

h7

u\tI&p u\  I    9{uh7{\`u^``)(^7h
u ff &\975
I@~K$\  -%5dd#"!fi%&=Gp
G3!$d!]T%!]
5%"! &}!dfi%!
J'pT!] !$"!zR
 \    _>HF; ='Y  9uu
  	 \
{

-

q+

 2
;8 



t

 
v

HI@55   ]{    zu\.h 	 `\\u
]ff$-%5dd#"! %=&Gp+,Gd!]d!]"%!$W5%!"&}!d%!$ "pT!]_d!]T!
Rq.  \        pG\;$r]ufi{ 	 \
HI@-7  O
 h& @    'Y7h` n? \2h] ff
 }%1dd#T!%=&Gpt8 G !]!!]!$"%!]Fd
 A ]-8( 5%!"&}!dfi%! ( <d="
!]#*%<r!]N"! !'&<%T%!j( TZ ]-8(.  u\    _
u\t$I&7] u\
 :Y  \* 	 u 	 h\{2\K77 &d ST$!$T

p
!  I  ff_  ff_   _,]>~\\h ff"uj( 
 )!dp

?

 1

fi Y\qp$X[\i\q

i7Y\rr{i7Y]

HII&] 'h\\h>Y   9)@u` 	 u uhu.( u
ff y-}%1dd#T!W%=&Gp
G
T%!]A5%!'&<!d %! & S"]d!]T)j!x

 
\]    6
 ,
 \$Iff$99W9&ff &

-.



 

^

o) 8

  h\&97- @u&O  |6h  
*u,\ h)   	 u
u
 {h7n
? hu=ff-%5dd#"!%=&fiGp
G!]!$T%!]]N%!"&}! 
% !QJ""!$
Ddd!]T!  1 A
 h\u\
  ff
 uu{ 	 \
 



+

q

P

\h; I&w~G  {\h7,  7u 	 ,.\.ufiff-%
d#"!%&fiGp G!]!$T%!]Y#,%, %!d!"&%T%!$-%5T! 	S8 
  
$9  R~@    \  _  _  & ) u





 +




Qh3K  
 ~\\\}u \hF!$d!]T%!]
vJ
% d!]%&
5 p}Y#<       _



8

^




8
FH&

uff~7Gh37}R ]vFF  $9 \\`hF\
u{ 	 \hG 	 u pffI-}%1dd#T! %=&-GpffG !$d!]T%!]
%8  %d %j
!
J 'pT!] d!]T! 
 \\   ufi{ 	 \







^

uN~S:O      ff. ` 6
 .
fi!]}"%!N%.pT!
    
 _,p ff_ 
>

\
~
\







h

5

"
ff
7





O

u




ff










)





H








&





u





`]
 






-75   \-97-'@\\]~7- '&K   HI7h7 	  	 u
\ \* \\` ffj-}%1dd#T!%=& G
,G
T%!]A5%!'&<!d%!
& S"]d!]T)j
! I
 

 h\u\
  ff99W9*ffN67
 

 

 ^

,) 

!pGQ-T!r)T!

 	 \W     -G<=%=& Gp
T!]T
 *^ rT%!
!]J
# T  d!]T!>&\$'F\I)h  



2$pI&F  ${,QK`u

{

\R$

  N vD.#<: T!fiGpt
K)767



	 u 7@ 	  >ff
G}%  )}%!]G 5\  _  ^\u\\

)]

{

X



I    HI7dhn?h7 \.u\ 2\hu
 \h

; >I&Y
 ~7  *u ] 7 7>'&$3YR\  
J'p"!$ !$"!
  &!
 S"!$Tnp
! d -%J
 "\,  p  _'Gu$ W97]
 9

{u`Wff



 \ 

X

% 4



] I&@  HI  \d?Bu 	 u . u$ "pT!]-d!$"!p,

{]
 5I&@  q,+j-}%p}:&%xJ"pT!] Gdd!]T!=u{ 	 \]~\
{

_  _   

 ]  9

~\h]37 IGu.  B
    
 'h@uhn?hu?B.$u\
u{7u\h7h]ff  }%1dd#T! %=&WGp G!]!$T%!] v%"!$Z5%!"&}!%!
& S
 "]d!]T)j! I  Y &  \   hhu u\

 

 q 8



`+

&

=

~\]n:.~.{\*37r~u*d;> $  _  G{ u`7*ffy-%5dd#"!
%=fi
& Gp  ,G &!]!p  dA %P p %d %!N%.p"%!$ d!]T!$>pd%#P 
 
\_  ff_  ]

K 


F



f

?

 

 

fiUWfV XYZ$X[Y]\

')uY $  Z~\O \h 	 uhhuff  %5dd#"!&%=&G
!]#5%!'&<!d%! ]# Tpt&, >   \    
 \`\hpff\

+

 )

 

'\ O  |h   	 h.
 %."%!] G  ff_ 
5
  _  

2

,5*\  J~\ 	



$

HI7u 	 u

2



Gh\@

dF

 %pT%!]#

	 h 	 uF)u$]ff:\h;pI&  *ut

)

]7]' R$\   J'pT!]Ddd!]T!8q !`&d ST!$T)j!dX-r}%J' $%
u\      uu{ 	 \]H 97  9
X]
 G  hF] @  y \\`7 \d? 	 @\h@
ff  ff=HFh4$
 R  Y-}%1dd#T!W%=&GpC, G!$d!]T%!$A5%!'&<}!d %! J""!$
 dd!]T! FH+  \\    9{\9 *uffuu{ 	 \
D
]

~ 7hd^ hu)(hu ff
) {   \
@.37]@2n $R$\  Y-%5dd#"!&%=&G
rT!h.#,v%, %!y 
"p T!] dd!]T! T!!'<& %T%! N \   N9W99&ff6. '\hIG\
~ff~     

K





?

 "

\)

P

fi        	 
 ff fi  ff     
    ff     	                 

 ! "ff 
 
  #  $  % & '  !  ff    #( $  

)+*-,. ,/(021 34,65879/(:<;9= . ,7>:(?@1 ?@AB)C. A4;9:<1 0<DFEG74?@HI1 02JK)CLFLF. 1 /7>021 ;-?I02;
0<D@,NMPONMQ*-. 1 HF1 ?@A9= RS1 . ,6TSU@VV. ,
WXY[Z9\ ]<^	X`_ a b X`\ ]
r s(tvu(w9x y z x4{| } | x ~  @	x   ~ x   ~  
tx  x 92w9x y z x 2r } ~ x | 
(22<_>	 ^	`Y(\ b  
  `  | ~> y |   |>9|  x ~  4|   
|    y   2w9x y z x-     <r } ~ x | 

c d e2f9g`h`i j h(k e`l`d m(k i no-k p`q`o
 g`h`c o9f4p` k m`dpg`l`i q`l(k h`p<k i c

   2
 9 <  9@  (  @@ -@      @(   F        @              F    
       2    <                     (       -           [      	    
  4      4      C     9 > (   (  -   4        4 4F         C  
F            F       @ 4  F   9  - 4 F    9  -          9  4          	
    <                      2 `  (     @     4  4       -      (      -
      > @      22>F  (F   >       >       >      S-  2         @        
          FF     @  4  4       @F      (@      9        F           
F            -             @-  @                      - >  @      
   @F             9    4     9  9      K        4    	@   4 S @
    >      9      - <  9@    F   @         F      2  F             4  
  F  @ CFv                  9   >       @  F  `       	  4     C >   
 - @      @           (  -    
<       
9  > @           F`  [`         F      `     
`      49     `  > F F4           29-         C` >      
 ``     - @      4 9  ` 9  4  4`      4   F      < 4   
      F`        9   `          >            F        
`             2  	S     9`   < 4 F`  F >     9  F `   
  
 - 9    fffi2    @4`   2            
   	 99 - ``@       
 F    F  
      	   ( ` `   4       
     
 @ F   F[F  ` @ `  	`S     [    !`     S     "
`     #
  $    &%4   &'9    
 (  ) *
+-, `
   . 
+-/4    . 0
+-1<   23>    -
9 >   4  . 
+2       
 65    	  . .
+2   
   . 0
+39` #
 7/4       *  &8-    
   `   ` 2` 92    @      `  49  -  > (     > @  > `   4`     > ` 
 `  -  
 <    " `    > -` 92  -(
 92  F  !`   >`   `      9    "
`       > `       !`   	`  F`   C    F   9   F 9  F9 `  
`   @`      9@`    9   !`       9 4             
     v  `9 
     @     `   F- `  9 @        -  F  !`     `   	`  	4  
 	 
 ` 
    F `  - ` "   !`  4 	`     <    >    4     - 9  `  " `   9
  !`         >            9 9>  < 4`  9	   @ ( @F  >   9	   4    
        9        4 - @       `        9  @      `   &
 :  

;@    (	`	    
<    #  
 ff  <  #4=>    >2   "  ? !  ff      @ 	   ff   
      A  # @

fiB2C D
EGF H I J
F C D#KLM
N
EGOP
C JGQR
S TUV W X S X&WYS ZU [ \TS TUfi]
U ^U _GS X `2ZU-a b V Ufibc
TU ^WdfiU ^W^eV b f f U g#S TUhi j k j i lmn op k q rts uv[ ^ S W^`
w x y y
z
{| b S V T}~-U  W^\G` w x x 
z u#b |  W [ S V T}V W S S ` w x x 
z uvWW^U  ` w x y x  
~YU(S WeS TU( U | vf b | \ U^Y
dfi]
U | W ad(b V | W Xfib  b [ f b ]f Ua W | b V 
Y[ X [ S [ W^`4bf U b | ^[ ^\#c | W \ | b d
dfiYX S]
UX U f U V S [  U[ ^W | g
U | S W&W]S b [ ^fib&d(b V | W&X U SZ[ S TfiT[ \T(YS [ f [ S  4 TU\ Wb f W aS T[ X | U X U b | V T-[ X
S Wg
U dfiW^X S | b S U-S T
b S-b(X [ d(cf Ud(b V | W  f U b | ^[ ^\S U V T
^[ 
YU `2V Wdfi][ ^U gvZ[ S TeS TU | [ \T S-X U f U V S [ W^
dfiU V T
b ^[ X dfiX `4V b ^#f U b gS W#beX c
U U gGY
cf U b | ^[ ^\b f \ W | [ S T
dS T
b Sfi[ Xc
W ZU | a Yfb ^g\ U ^U | b f ` U S
X [ d(cf U(b XZU f f 
 U-X S b | S] g
U _^[ ^\eba | b dfiU ZW |  a W | X U f U V S [  Ufid(b V | W  f U b | ^[ ^\b ^geg
U X V | [ ]
UfiS TU-\ U ^U | b f
b | V T[ S U V S Y | U-W abfid(b V | Wfif U b | ^U | 4 TU(j   o n rfi i j o k i q n j  a | b dfiU ZW |  s u#b |  W [ S V T(}V W S S `
w x x   [ XYX U geS W(g
U X V | [ ]
U(S TU b | [ WYX&f W \ [ V b f	V Wd(c
W^U ^ S X&W a4bd(b V | W(f U b | ^U |  ^vc
b | S [ V Yf b | `
S TU-a | b dfiU ZW |  U d(c
T
b X [  U X&S TU[ d(c
W | S b ^ S | W f UW aS TU-X U f U V S [ W^vdfiU V T
b ^[ X dfiX-YX U gegGY | [ ^\S TU
f U b | ^[ ^\ec | WV U X X   UV W^ S [ ^YUfi] g
U X V | [ ][ ^\S TU( G2 -   	 b f \ W | [ S T
d  Wd(b  U-S TU
c | U X U ^ S b S [ W^b ^geS TU-U 
c
U | [ dfiU ^ S X-V f U b | U | `
ZUc | U X U ^ S&S TUb f \ W | [ S T
d7[ ^S ZWfiX S b \ U X   U&_ | X S
g
U X V | [ ]
UbX [ d(cf [ _GU g U | X [ W^eW aS TUb f \ W | [ S T
dtS T
b S&f U b | ^Xfid(b V | W X&a W | bX [ ^\ f Ug
Wd(b [ ^#b S-b
S [ dfiU   U-S TU ^X TW Zbfi\ U ^U | b f [  U gv U | X [ W^S T
b SV b ^eT
b ^g
f Ufiba b dfi[ f W ag
Wd(b [ ^X 
 G2 -   	 4`2f [  Ub f f4W S TU | d(b V | W  f U b | ^U | X `2[ XfiYX U a Yf	a W |  i j   j  fiX U b | V T  u#b V | W 
f U b | ^[ ^\fiT
b Xb-^U \b S [  UYS [ f [ S fiZ&TU ^fiYX U ga W | o mi j rfij  j    q  n  s u#b |  W [ S V T-}W X g
U YS X V TU | `
w x x   	  U ^(Z&TU ^S TU&f U b | ^U ged(b V | W Xb | U&WcS [ d(b fGS TU b | U&^W SYX U a YfGa W | WcS [ dfi[  [ ^\(X U b | V T
c | WV U gGY | U X   ^W Z[ ^\S TUX TW | S U X SZb fia | Wd6c
W [ ^ S-S Wc
W [ ^ S-7b ^geS TU-X TW | S U X SZb (a | Wd
S Wfig
WU X-^W SS U f f	YX&b ^ S T[ ^\b ]
WYSS TU-WcS [ d(b f [ S W a	S TU [ | V W^V b S U ^
b S [ W^ 
 TU[ ^
c
YS4a W | S TU- G2 -   	 #b f \ W | [ S T
d[ Xb-g
Wd(b [ ^` X c
U V [ _GU ge] (b-X U S4W a2]
b X [ V&Wc 
U | b S W | X `
bTU Y | [ X S [ Va Y
^V S [ W^s ^W S&^U V U X X b | [ f vb gGdfi[ X X [ ]f U  a W | U  b f Y
b S [ ^\S TUfidfiU | [ S&W aX S b S U X `
b ^gbea Y
^V S [ W^a W | \ U ^U | b S [ ^\ | b ^g
Wd'\ Wb fX S b S U X  TU# G2 -   	 b f \ W | [ S T
dc
U | 
a W | dfiXk q  n Gj  (p lfiq  m
q n j rfiq Gi  i j o s uv[ S V TU f f `
S \ W 4` }b ^U |  [ ` w x y   2 S\ U ^U | b S U XX W f  b ]f U
S | b [ ^[ ^\#c | W]f U dfiXZ[ S T#b ^v[ ^V | U b X [ ^\vf U  U fW ag
[ V Yf S  e TU(S | b [ ^[ ^\vc | W]f U dfiX(b | U(X W f  U g
] #bX U b | V T#c | W \ | b dtS T
b Sfic
U | a W | dfiXfiT[ f f  V f [ dfi][ ^\V Wdfi][ ^U gZ[ S T#bec | WV U gGY | U(a W | U X V b c[ ^\
f WV b fdfi[ ^[ d(b # TUU X V b c
U | WYS U X(b | US TU ^ | U V W | g
U gb Xfid(b V | W X v TUc | W]f U d'X W f  U | YX U X
S TU-X b dfiU-X U b | V Tc | WV U gGY | U `YX [ ^\d(b V | W Xb X[ a4S TU ZU | U]
b X [ VWc
U | b S W | X   G2 -   	 
c
U | a W | dfiX(S TUvd(b [ d(b f&c
W X X [ ]f Uv\ U ^U | b f [  b S [ W^] S | [ ^\b f fS TUvd(b V | W X([ ^b f f&S TUX S b S U X 

YV TvbdfiU S TWgv[ ^V | U b X U X-S TUfi] | b ^V T[ ^\a b V S W | ] S TUfi^Y
dfi]
U | W ad(b V | W X&b ^gvZWYf g#]
UfiS WW
U 
c
U ^X [  UZ&TU ^vYX U g#[ ^vX U b | V Tvc | WV U gGY | U X-X YV T#b X-]
U X S  _ | X SX U b | V T  X [ ^\S T[ XfidfiU S TWgv[ ^
T[ f f  V f [ dfi][ ^\X [ \^[ _GV b ^ S f  | U gGYV U XS T[ XW  U | TU b gvs Y
^f U X XS TU&X W f YS [ W^X4a WY
^gb | UX [ \^[ _GV b ^ S f 
f W^\ U |  
 TUfib | V T[ S U V S Y | U(W a G2 -   	 V W^ S b [ ^X]
Y[ f g
[ ^\#]f WV  X-S T
b S-b | Ufi[ ^X c[ | U g] eS TU
U b | f [ U | ZW |  XW a4d(b ^ W S TU || U X U b | V TU | X 4{ U ^U | b S [ ^\S | b [ ^[ ^\c | W]f U dfiX&Z[ S T[ ^V | U b X [ ^\g
[ a 
_GV Yf S Zb Xfig
W^Urfi Gh k k le] X U  U | b f | U X U b | V TU | X#s a W | U 
b d(cf U  ]
b
` w x y 
z uv[ ^ S W^` w x y 
z
uv[ S V TU f fU Seb f  ` w x y    Us Y
] }&[ ]f U | ` w x x   YX U gT[ f f  V f [ dfi][ ^\S Wb  W [ gU 
c
W 
^U ^ S [ b f[ ^V | U b X U#[ ^X U b | V TS [ dfiUb Xeb | U X Yf SeW a(b g
g
[ ^\d(b V | W X  	 s uv[ ^ S W^` w x y  
b ^g#2			s  ]
b
` w x y   YX U gd(b V | WX U f U V S [ W^dfiU S TWg
XS T
b S-[ ^X c[ | U gS TU(W^UYX U g] 
 G2 -   	   TU G2 -   	 eb | V T[ S U V S Y | U4[ X4bZU f f  ]
b f b ^V U gb ^gZU f f  S Y
^U g(V Wd
][ ^
b S [ W^W aS TU X U]
Y[ f g
[ ^\v]f WV  X&S T
b SU dfiU | \ U geb a S U | U S U ^X [  UU 
c
U | [ dfiU ^ S b f	X S Yg
 
 TUd(b [ ^fig
Wd(b [ ^(Y
c
W^fiZ&T[ V T G2 -   	 Zb XS U X S U gfi[ X4S TU\ U ^U | b fGe6X f [ g
[ ^\ 
S [ f Uc
Y  f Ufis b S ^U | }  b | dfiYS T` w x x   Z&T[ V T-[ ^V f Yg
U Xb X	X c
U V [ b fV b X U X	S TU y  c
Y  f U ` w   c
Y  f U
b ^g(S TU    c
Y  f U 4 TU y  c
Y  f U-b ^gS TU w   c
Y  f U-c | W]f U dfiXT
b  Uf W^\fi]
U U ^c
Wc
Yf b | b dfiW^\
d(b S TU d(b S [ V [ b ^Xs  WT
^X W^#}7S W |  ` w y  x
z  | b [ S V T[  ` w x  
z2 b [ S ` w y y   b ^g -&| U X U b | V TU | X 


fi   
 
e


   


 G# 
#
 
 G#

(t	G   
(   
      e
    (  ( fi (fi  & (fi #  #
(  & &     e 
     
           
fi& v(          #  	   
 

	   

&     

2   e -      


 &    	   
  G  2	     	    fi 4 

         
      (
    
 &   (     e 4    
   G    e fi               fi    &        
     ( 
   		       
G 
 fiff-
   fi
   6
 &              (  

 -   
    

          
   #
    !"		 
      ( #  fi 
   $     v fi       e %2  
  (
  ( 
( 
 
 v  (      fi  
   
    &        
 
  
    & (	   fi      e v 
 &  # 

   ee
(     
   Gv      
      # 
 ' (   ' )+*   , 
   e
       
 & -
 (    -.
 #  fi    $  
 /          ( - ,
 #   #    ( 
     	 2 
   
 0 '   2143 ( 5"3  6 7 'fi  4       
 - 2 (  

     4 ff    
 -    e & fi
 
 & & -    $   &(    fi           
7     
 

     
 8:9<;fi=fi>9fi?@  

      - -
 (    fi         (            
 
 fi           efi    fi
 vfi
   (
   
  &      
    &   
     fi (
   (fi  (  
(     
 
 
   2     
      
 
 2
   
e   v  A
         e &            v      
 

   
   t
 
    
  (
      #  e fi -

   fi   e 
     

 
      	 -      
7fi    (  
 
   
(  fi ##-   
  &     
(      e    2
        fi
     	 e 

 vfi  ( 	
  4 
  fi       v(    
  -  &     4 &      e    
    - 4  (    
#   
   
    fi (  #
(  #    2	 
 8B ;?DC<E FB G G 9fi? H      
  
 (     e
(     
 
 
   "
 ##fi( 
 %2   
  fi  ( 	
(     
 
 
 
        
 # 
  e  &    v     # 
   
    fi 
   fi e
   fiv    

(   fi   fi    G  #
(    
 
 
   

   fi    
 ##   
e -

   fi   
    
(   (
 fi     & 
        
7 & 
  v
(     
 
 
  
    
 
  (        e(          #  
    G ( (     ( v
( 
I
 & 

    fi(          (    4     
 J
     
 & &     fi 8B ;?DC<E FB G G 9fi? H4K    
   
 4     (     
      fi     ,
 
fi
     
  -

   fi   L
   
 8B ;?DC<E FB G G 9fi? H
M
     e
(   -(       
   
(  .
     
     
 #  -     
8B ;?DC<E FB G G 9fi? He 
 4   & -    &  fi  fi 2
(  4 
   
 %2          (-    

fi   
   fi      
     
  4 
       G 4
   fi       fi      
  	  
  e N 
   fi
(   +
 O 
    fi     e(
       e 
fi-

 8B ;?DC<E FB G G 9fi? HNP 
      & 
   Q     
  (
     (   (                
fi 
RfiSITUV WfiXfiY Z<[N\N]L^_4`Da `DVb c dfi`efUVgY Zh i"`DUY \Nc \4X

 +j#
&L     fi'  (  3 '  4k
&L     4 g3 l (   l '4&     
    4m2nk 
& 
   ,mo j:pqjrs tu 4m
 v 4wxt
   fi 
 Nm
 v  

  2NffMl y z 3  
   

 { v | } v ~   &  2
 v |4nj &     e I D   ( zD'  (  3 v ~nj      e  ( z'  (  3   ff
 <     <      +2  N            fi2     x     <                :        4     
         g  + L    <  <D 4  "<      2<  L  g     4   D    +fi<     +  L      
        "    2     4       2      
    fi   +            "   fi   "+           N         <   fi  <     <   <  fi   g      D  
  N      24    + +     +       2   g     
  

fi< gD   g  :,ggDg D

      2 L  g  " <g     L              I g N +     4      4x gfixg  
I      + 2      + 4   2    "     , 4  g   D :              
       g     " I  g  I +g     f           2.I     g    
 g        "
	fiff I g  I  Lg   g     4   g    "  2 g  I
  g  2 4g     +  g   L gg   g      D  g       4 I 
 gg  <

:  N



 +     fi  <     g
      fi      

    L   






!

           
#x I       g g   $  g         "g     
%
"
   g   ,g     2       fi             <'& (     (   g   
<Ng       (  )#     "g     
%,+,g fiffN * + ,.-  /  #+ < %  0   
 +   ( ,:  '#M 0%,fi  Igg  +g     g      Ig     : '#Mg   
,     :  g<21L  I g 
3    .4+   2g 5<      f I     :    6      
      :g      g      L g   2   
+ $7+I            : 
     8   9      6M   :  
  2   L N 2         g   " 4 2   L N       
     
; ,     < +I  " +I     => L     g   ,,g   .<,g       (  #  
  L 4g     
 %,g Lg  : 

?A@ B CB D  =

4 N
ff  *

+ ,.-  /  #+ < %EFffN * + ,.-  /  #+ < %FGfi=  
H 
;   I      +,   +I   ,g     L   :   g   7  (  g    :2  (  
g       (  "    2  (  :   
    g      x
I   Ig   2  2D  "
  f D g     g  FJ>+
   gg      fi(     ",g     g D  "
  "JfiK
?CB D  = 4 LMN @ O  Nff  * + ,.
-   /  +#  < 
% E'Nff  * + ,.
-   /  +#  < %PGQ=  ! 
R 
 Q             S$  L   . 2g g g2 2       ,   + (   g   
  g    
I  I L g      (  , :
T   $  (    0UV3     SH W W X  74Y gg   '
R    g I g   Z  
    D      D     "
      L I      2  g   4   (  
 g    
T   < D +I               4g        D  

9  "<  [ g     D     , 
T       4   
H W \ X   ; Ig    .   (       g   2 :  g     g   2 Ng      g   
Dg  I
  L     S&  (  ,  + <g     S,
% 2g     g  , fig   
J g 2g   
   (  S+
#     g <2I          
       + 2  g    4 fiI     g     S
=    
 g  ?CB D  = " Ig     (  4    g      fi 2 2g  g      N + (   < g  
      S=]L
   4g     (  D L 2 gg I    L   I       2g    I
      
T   $  (    I 03    2 H W W X N    D   I  ^       
+8       "9     +  D$  "     
:
   ,    I   QL  g    FL         g     g           (   ; 
    +
  ,
$  g    D >(       N gg 2 +       g      2 :     
      
K      ( 
 gg      L       (        4       (   g     +       (                (   
  :     ;     + $)(  LL     g    L L    I   g      ,    "  
    I   fiD
_  L "    I gg      g  I g   I       :  g   < g  
   g     g   Dg 2 I 

$  L   . 2g  2 ,g     2g   f   (    ; ">( 
D      g  fiL
      g  L I   L      <     QL     2    I   2D_  2
 
``a

fib c d cef.g h.cfii7j.ek.l.m d c j.k.n.g n>o'p l.k'bl.d h.g n>o'f.q.cQrts2rvuw>x x d c

Experience
Filter
Problem
Generator

Training
Problem
Solver

Training
Problems

Search
Traces

Attention
Procedure

Acquisition
Filter
Retention
Filter

Macro
Database
Utilization
Filter

Macro
Operators

Macro
Operators

Operator
Sequences
Attention
Filter

Acquisition
Procedure

Learning System
Performance System

User Problems
Solutions

Target
Problem
Solver

Basic
Operators

yz {|.} ~2               2     )                 7S            
S          
  
     2 
                       )               S       7     
         S                 7 )          )    S              
     2 )             A           
               
  )  P)     
  )      S         )         )      2              A           
   S    A   )     S A  )     S    2                
~{ ~ ~ }  A }  z  ~   |.} ~ A~ } ~ fi 2 ~z   } 2  z   >  ~ } z {2 }  )~ } > z      z   ~ Q 
   z ~72  }    ~  } z {>Az 
  fiz 0yz {|.} ~Q 
' }   z   fi F    } {|~) .  ~2 }  
.|z  .z {0 |  ~    |S ~  } z {fi   ~ )   ~ Q z ~ )z fi ~  ~   z {fi ~2} z {  )z .  z fi S>  ~ }  
   } ~  |~ . )z .  z   
~ z   z { 2  }    ~  } z {   ~ )fi} ~  ~   Q . Q   ~0    z z {
 .z   z    ~ Q>  ~ } z {fi)~  . z  ).~ }  } )~ fi ~
)   |  ~    | ~  } z {>
7   7 >.>
 0 z 
 ~   z 0~).z   | 2F >A     AQ. }  z  |  }z      z   z 0  ~7 }  z  ~   |.} ~
.~   } z .~ ' .  ~ . z .  7 ~ } 2 z 2 ~ > ~ . ~ }  |~ |{7 2.~ }  } t~ 7 z ~   ~  } z {
z 2  } { ~    S A.}  ~ t.2 z  SF >A     S  z  ~)  2  }    ~  } ~ }   }  z  
        fi z )'V > ~      ~  }  0.}  {}  ) z  ~  .}  {}  )  ~){  z 
 7
   | z      .   z  ~} ~ { } . ~  A . ~S ~ {   . ~S   | z  |.   ~  }     > S  
.| '.}  {}  ) .z     F| ~2~ |.} z   z 2 |.  z 
z  0 ~ }  ~2 
.} ~  ~ } ~  ~Q.} ~ .z    ~   ~
 ~  }    }   ~ { .} ~  ~ } A ~ .. 
    ~ z  
  ~ }   |~   z } ~  z .~ }~ |.} z   z 
 |.  z z  fi } ~ ~  ~    } z  fi|..~ } ~   z 2  z {>.| } ~
   .  z  z  ~ >~  ~ z Q ~
{      ~ 
~ } ~Q ~ P.  ~Q0 ~ } '   |~ F'~Q    | P~ |.} z   z Q |.  z 0           
'  7  ~  ~
~ |.} z   z 
 |.  z } .~ }    ~ } ~   .  7~  ~  ~ z 0) 2  |.).~ } 
   )z z 2.S~.  z z .~ 
 F >A     fiz S 
  .|z } ~2  }   .~ }   } A }~    z {
 }    )z z 2.z  ~  2  }  
 . 
 ~  ' } Q   )z z )|. 0Q    ~)z  Ffi.~   ~ }
~ |.} z   z )   |~ 
F >A     0}  S 2{ ~ ~ }   z {) }  z z {2.}  ~ ) 7   z {) ~ Q  { 7 
 ).~  ~     )z z 2)z  7| ~

 ~  }  7)~  Q | Q z      z )z {>z  Qz  |  ~  z  ~


fiA .>   .  't7... 
 	 
 ff fi  fiff       "!#%$ &' ( ( )*! +-,.  ./.  fi0    1 
   fi2 3 4	   .50 2  fi
.   6   72    5  ff   3ff 89  :0 2  fi1 .   6 39fi8 	;<   ff 00 8 =ff: 
 ff 
fi  fi,fi5% "!#%$ &' ( ( )*! +	.  ff  
  .> >ff?ff @,> ff.  ff  ?  5ff2     ,  .   
6 ff  , 
ff 8  
  8.A  .7 . 
 ff 0 , >ff .7ff'fiff 
   1 0  ff   %B" 7C2ff'0  8 D" 8/  fi  A;	>. ff @ ff 
 "!#%$ &' ( ( )*! += . =E FG H I J H KJ H? L .   6  .'CM
 .  
 ,  6   ff   3	0 2  fi.?  ,
ff 
 N,   35ff  @5 ?Ofiff 
   . 7 "!#%$ &' ( ( )*! +	N,  .? 5 8   
  .N,  . 
  
  
;< /,.  8 A.   6 3 P   ff   @/. ,00   8L0 2  fi.  "!#%$ &' ( ( )*! +	,.  .> ',  
 '2ff .  
'0  ff   .ff 8/   ff   8Lfiff 
   . %;<  ff 
  8/?  5ff 
 ff %fi  fi,fi5 >.  ff  
  .
 'ff : . 
 ff 0/ , 2,'8 . ff 
 N,  /fiff 
   . Q'Lff     ff   6 6   .  :
 ff 	0    fiM 1
  /  ff   3RA 3, S/.  ?.' / "!#%$ &' ( ( )*! +=ff  3    fi5%5
 fi0    ff  3    fi
?>  8	 5. 0 
   @ff5fi  8L 3    ff   3:  ff   3L0 2  fi.ff 8ff5fi  8:  . 
 ff 0 3
  fiM 
 ff fi  fiff5:T"U V W H X>Y UZ V H [-0 
  8, /.   6  .2  L   ff   3	ff 8	 .   6 3
 P   ff   @5. ,00   80 2  fi. 
\%] ^`_"ab ac d e f"a	gh*i*aj e ak%c a"lm/ak"aj nd e k"op_"q"b fnr*b asj q"r*b at	uv/e d w=x k%c j anu e k"o
y af"ab uqz'{5e |=c}%b d ~
	2ff .  
	ff  
    
  , L ff9fiff 
   1   ff   39. @.   fi  N,   .:ff9fi 
 ff  . fi 3    ff   3
  ff   3/0 2  fi.ff 8:fffi  8/ *D     3/  fi  ff     ff   6   @ fffi  8/ 7 8   3
  fi Afiff  /3 ff " * D   > . . ff 6   ff   35  . , 
  .2 @/
 
     ff   35  0  ,
0 2  fi. %L 
 ,./ Lff       9 ' :  ff    >,/ff 
 N, .    <fi  8=
 .  8  ./ @
fiff 
   .' ff ff  0ff   .'  .   ,  0ff  "      % 5. ff 6   ff   3	  . , 
  . *ff/3 8
0 2  fi3    ff  . , 83    ff   @	.   6 ff 2 50 2  fi. : 	ff 88   "A  .8 .   ff 2 5 
 8    ff   3:0 2  fi. : 
   ff .  3:  6   . 78 /
 ,  @  .'. ff 6  .  ff   3L  . , 
  .
2 @5ff 
 N,   35ff .fi,
 : ?  83 ff .0 . .  2 ,.  3/ ff . @50 2  fi. 
 53 8=?ff @	 L fi0  fi  5. ,
 9ff	0 2  fi3    ff   9fi  8   3 @ ./ 	  N,  Lff
8fiff   1 . 0 
  D
/3    ff  >  ff 
 :8fiff  "R Pff fi0  %.   6 ff 2 /0 2  fi.' L L
0,   	8fiff  =
 ff =2L3    ff   8p2 @=0    fi 3=ff 9 6  =0  fi, ff   =9 :3 ff .  ff   
  
 ' *,>fiff  /3 ff  .?ff .7 fiff   ff  3    fiff .>8fiff   1  8 0 8  ff .0 . .  2  
?>:ff 6 5. ,00   8<ffL8  ff , /8fiff   1  8 0 8 53    ff   ff ?>  . =fiff  @8fiff  . 
 
  ,8 3: '.   8 3 1    50,      ,8  ff , '0 2  fi3    ff  >ff . . ,fi .      ? 3
 . 0 
  D
 ff   / % 0 2  fi-8fiff   
  ,8 .'ff ff  3    fi *3    ff   3 ff 8fi
 
3 ff ".  ff   
.  ,  . .   ' . @5'3 ff ".  ff    
. ff  Y H W H Y I G Z V H * *     .ff 0  ff  A
  
   3.  ff  ' > .  ff   
 Q " 0  ff   >
  /   ' .'ff  . /
ff .  N, 
 
  *0  ff   .
  
   35  /  
     :	 5=  <    "O          "  *5  7p      %
Q    ff   6   @  '. 0 
  D
 ff   : A '8fiff  5 
  ,8 .ff  .  7  6   . '0  ff   . 
  2  fi.ff  3    ff   82 @	ff 00 @ 3ff: ff 8fi.  N, 
 5 0  ff   .' Lff: ff 8fi @	3   1
  ff   8p3 ff .  ff   ` .L0 
  . .: .L ?pff .	Y  K U [A V  	  3  p  	 ff 8fi
.  N, 
 / .' 
   ff .  89ff     ff 
 	0 2  fi3    ff   " L. fi8fiff  . %? L  ff 8fi
 "  7  A        A   
 >   "   "  %
       9     *       "   "    "  7     >  % "       
"     *"       %       7     >   
  

fi    :/    	 	  	5-M*   

     "% '   *  >    '  
     ' 

 :    	ff

       '      *    7    : 
 
      7 !  "       "
#   $  7    :      >    '         % 
& !"       "       7 !    :'
+          

/            
fiO               

(' )*    )>        

     #   $  7    :      >    '         % 
#     	 
   
 :    ,- 
.0/ 1 23 4*5 675 8:9(8 <;=>?
 @!  /A >    'B      )  DC"      
 ! %  /       E %        
(7     )     $  GF #   @!  )  GF
#     5 #     H" " /
  /  
.0/ 1 23 4*5 675 8:9(8 JIK .0L ?
0
.
/
1

2
3 4*5 675 8:9(8   
!
'/      M      
   :F
N POA (QA    +       
  N  
#     5 #     H" " N
 !C"                    B7 N 
+     #     
OA (QA     +          :
R S    T  	U75L    : !'      N
%
W
W
W

  :    / X  / V   W W W     E %       F

,

/ V  W W W/ X

OA  YR[Z[\ ] /  ^>    _a` b c d e f g \ h

         7     D    i  !G           D) D     
j        k  l: m      a  "    '          k   n   n     j     l:    
     	)             :  )>  m      o          F & 	   '  	 
  (  ' !     	 n  !    n         o        D)  T      
 ! :  J)  k(F &   9  D)>5  = : :      T!    = /       
 ! 5     p/    n  n )  o 5      D)   5    GFm:      
   D      	T            @  )>  T            a 	        
  !  :  q)  k	    5    D)  m /     =      5     / ! GFT
      5         :)  /          7F0                   /  
r r s

fitGu vw(x y z {x u vm|~}@w(u {(

  a               [ G        D   @         H(H  DD  
     D 		D               
 T    aD     @@	  :        :  @   a [     T   	 
           	   7  G           H [D  :    [~  0   0 (<T 
     H([	  H   	       DD      	 [ qa               	   
   :         @   @ H   	 0   	   H      	   D   
  0 G @    (     m    (                0    @  D   : @       :     
 @ D       : @ @ :H     0      H0  	  0   	     [    
	    	 0   	 :       :   0 @                  D  
 (   T	    	  D             @           T 0	      
G 7    7mD  ((  G[: HG   7ff*(  7D[(H 7ff  GP[G ( G am 
   T7  
    :	     @         @   @ [   :	     T DD   ([     (     
 @D  :    ( @  a @ D  T	(    T   @    DD   0D      
 T      -        0D           T D     D T     o  	     
     	       a  (   G
 mD    :  o             -   a m    P   (   T     
       
      : [   D
    0
        
  ((  D    0           
    0
  [
       @  @
            T  (  
 D      m	            D     
7TD      m TD   	      D@D  m    T      m: 
     0         D	          T D      :     H     
ff([      @	  : [o 7(G    H    D           (     
	      T      	  0        (   
(     @	  @  o 7(G    H a :     D    0    	  ~   
	  	     [     G-    [ [ D   (	  	:       	   (   D 
       0    7  D    G  G H    7 	   	  	   H        [
D         a @  (     T	  T     H     :         :   ( 
 T    @  <T   	  	:o  :D    	  :   a @     	        m  
    7*mT     :	  -ff	 ( 	         	(     (7 : mff[         
          m           T (	                     D   :( 
 
 qP 	 
  ff ff ff  	 fiDaa     ff o  7 
 
 	   	  
  ff ff ff 	 
        	   : T    
      T    :       m  D    a 	 
  ff ff ff  	   T D          
    
 	   	  
  ff ff ff  	    	       ff a T	 ( 	         	       :(     o a  
      @    T   

 	  H    H 	      
H  fi  "!H    
#  $! # !&%' H    H  )(fi   
*+,

 

fi- . / .fi0fi132 43.65730fi8393: / . 7383;32 ;)<>= 938>-fi93/ 432 ;)<>13?3.@BA@DCFE)G G / .
HIfiJLKM N OQP RfiS T U3SfiP OQN V WfiNQO I3V OO IfiJLKM N OQN O V O JLR X"VYV P M RYUfiN OQZ3JV[ RfiP V [\Y] Sfi] YU3Y^Q_ OQN J M ` J N
O RLN V O ] N X WM J a3Ufi] M J YJ S ObLV Z3R ` J c&O I3V O\O IfiJ M JN IfiRfiUfi[ dZ3JQV NeX J fgYV P M R N\V N\h3R N N ] Zfi[ J ^"HIfiJN J P RfiSfid
P RfiS T U3SfiP OQN V WfiNQO I3V OO IfiJi[ V N OQN O V O JiYUfiN OQZ3JVZ3J O O J MN O V O J ^"_ OQN J M ` J NQO RN V O ] N X W6M J a3Ufi] M J YJ S Oj
V Z3R ` J c&O I3V OeYV P M R NFN IfiRfiUfi[ dZ3JUfiN J X Ufi[ ^\HIfiJ"O Ifi] M dP RfiS T U3SfiP OFN V WfiNFO I3V OFO IfiJYV P M R] NeO IfiJ"N IfiRfiM O J N O
N V O ] N X Wfi] SfikO IfiJQX RfiM YJ M\O f"RP RfiS T U3SfiP O N ^"_ ON J M ` J NO RN V O ] N X WO IfiJLO Ifi] M dlM J a3Ufi] M J YJ S OLV Z3R ` J c&O I3V O
YV P M R NN IfiRfiUfi[ d>Z3JV NQN IfiRfiM OQV NLh3R N N ] Zfi[ J ^QmnIfiJ S6VN U oP ] J S OLSfiU3YZ3J MQR XeN UfiP IlYV P M R NQI3V NLZ3J J S
V P a3Ufi] M J dpFO IfiJN J V M P I>h3M R kfiM V YDYV WlZ3JV Zfi[ JO R6V d3` V SfiP JO R fV M d6O IfiJk RfiV [eN O V O Jf] O IfiRfiUfiOLJ ` J M
Z3J ] SfikO M V h3h3J d6] S[ RfiP V [FY] Sfi] YV3^
qr s"tu v u wtnxzy{ |}~ { { |\ i |  | { L ) { |\  3{   |    y{ | l~ {ifi   |  | { y{ |
 ~ {Lif"J [ [  Z3J I3V ` J dfi{ fi   |  \ fi) |   "y{ |~ {i { |e i      3{   |    {i  | fi |F
 P RfiYhfi[ J O Je | 6 {  3{  |e|    ) 6 i ) )  
 i6}>   fi    fifi  fi     e3gB   3      "         
    { | {iYV P M RN J O N YRfiR O IfiN O IfiJIfiJ U3M ] N O ] PX U3SfiP O ] RfiS>Z WJ [ ] Y] S3V O ] Sfik>[ RfiP V [\Y] Sfi] YV3^HIfiJ
[ J Sfik O I>R XO IfiJ] Sfid3] `fi] d)U3V [LYV P M R Ni] SVP RfiYhfi[ J O JN J Oid3J h3J Sfid3NRfiS>O IfiJd3] N O V SfiP JZ3J O f"J J S>[ RfiP V [
Y] Sfi] YVV Sfid6O IfiJ ] MV N N RfiP ] V O J dlZ3J O O J M"N O V O J ^
qr s"tu v u wtgy{ |e}B~ { { |"  |  | {  )~ { { |"  3{   |    y{ |e >~ {fi   |  | { 
y{ |  ~ {if"J [ [  Z3J I3V ` J d&fi{ fi   |  \ fi) |   Qy{ |      i { ) | {| fi{Qfi  )6   |  ) {~ { | e{ { 
  )  l| fi{Qfi  ) { "){ ~ LFfi{LM V d3] UfiN  |  | {L L6}ze |  {  3{  |e|     )
 i { "){   
 fifi )fi   e    fi   Y   ]  S )              
Ffi{     i | fi{Qfi   |  | { ifiFfi{      i |  | {Ffi  6 L) |"     ) fiD  
HIfiJ ) fii |   ~ { | | { )K)[ O J M[ RfiRfi NN ] Y] [ V MO RO IfiJ ) fii |    ) fiQeK)[ O J M ] SfikiYJ O IfiRfid
UfiN J dZ W>_ Z3V> j     ^R f"J ` J M p)O IfiJ M JV M JN J ` J M V [\h3M RfiZfi[ J YNif] O IlO IfiJ ) fii |    ) fi
YJ O IfiRfidO I3V OO IfiJl ) fii |   ~ { | | { LK)[ O J MV ` R ] d3N ^lmnIfiJ S>O IfiJd3] N O V SfiP J6Z3J O f"J J SY] Sfi] YVl] N
[ V M k J p"O IfiJ>Y] Sfi] YU3Yi O R  Y] Sfi] YU3YK)[ O J Mf] [ [iV P a3Ufi] M Jl` J M W[ RfiSfikYV P M R N ^nHIfi] N`fi] R [ V O J NO IfiJ
O Ifi] M dM J a3Ufi] M J YJ S OV Z3R ` J ^e] kfiU3M J) V Q] [ [ UfiN O M V O J NO Ifi] Nh3M RfiZfi[ J Y^HIfiJV fi] NiN O V Sfid3NLX RfiMQO IfiJ
N J a3UfiJ SfiP JR X"N O V O J NV [ RfiSfik6O IfiJN R [ UfiO ] RfiSh3V O I^HIfiJV fi] NN O V Sfid3NLX RfiMLO IfiJIfiJ U3M ] N O ] P` V [ UfiJ NR X
N O V O J N ^\RfiSfikYV P M R NN UfiP I6V NO IfiR N JiV P a3Ufi] M J d>Z WO IfiJY] Sfi] YU3Yi O R  Y] Sfi] YU3YK)[ O J MO J Sfid6O RZ3J
YUfiP Ii[ J N N"k J SfiJ M V [F O IfiJ WV M JYRfiM J"[ ]  J [ WO RQX V ] [  ^eHIfi] N"h3M RfiZfi[ J YB] N\] S O J SfiN ] K)J df] O I] SfiP M J YJ S O V [
[ J V M Sfi] Sfik)^l_ S>O IfiJKM N OiN O V k J NiR X[ J V M Sfi] Sfik)peO IfiJY] Sfi] YV>V M JP [ R N JO R k J O IfiJ MiV SfidN IfiRfiM OYV P M R N
V M J[ J V M SfiJ d^&HIfiJ N J6YV P M R N peIfiR f"J ` J M p\YV  JY] Sfi] YV>YRfiM JN h3V M N J] S[ V O J MiN O V k J NR XQ[ J V M S 
] Sfik)p[ J V d3] SfiklO RO IfiJV P a3Ufi] N ] O ] RfiS>R X\` J M W6[ RfiSfiklYV P M R N ^iHIfi] Nh3M RfiZfi[ J YZ3J P RfiYJ NiJ fiO M J YJfQIfiJ S
O IfiJ M JL] NRfiSfi[ WRfiSfiJiY] Sfi] YU3Y] SO IfiJLN R [ UfiO ] RfiS6h3V O I^e_ SN UfiP IVP V N J pfiO IfiJiY] Sfi] YU3Yi O R  Y] Sfi] YU3Y
K)[ O J Mif] [ ["J ] O IfiJ ML[ J V M SSfiR O Ifi] Sfik)pFRfiMLf] [ [UfiN J_ Z3V3 NV h3h3M RfiV P I>V SfidP RfiSfiN ] d3J MiO IfiJN O V M OiV Sfid>J Sfid
N O V O J NQR X\O IfiJN R [ UfiO ] RfiSlh3V O IlV NLY] Sfi] YV3p[ J V d3] Sfik6O RO IfiJV P a3Ufi] N ] O ] RfiSlR X\O f"R` J M W[ RfiSfik6YV P M R N ^
_ Sfid3J J dp\fQIfiJ Sf"JO M ] J dO RlM J hfi[ V P JO IfiJ> ) fii |   ~ { | | { if] O I>O IfiJl ) fii |    ) fi
K)[ O J M p3 ) L   F lf"J S Oe] S O RiVL` J M Wi[ RfiSfikiN J N N ] RfiSR XV P a3Ufi] M ] Sfik` J M Wi[ RfiSfikYV P M R N ^e_ Z3ViI3V d
O RL] S O M Rfid)UfiP JLV SV P a3Ufi] N ] O ] RfiSK)[ O J MeO I3V O\Zfi[ RfiP  N"[ RfiSfikYV P M R Ne] SRfiM d3J MeO RiM J d)UfiP JO IfiJQI3V M YiX Ufi[ SfiJ N N
R XeO Ifi] NQh3IfiJ SfiRfiYJ SfiRfiS^
 ) "         ""        F            3Q"  "  \  ""        ""  "            
                e           e   F     F       	 
    )   ff "    L\   
  \    \   
  Q
fi

fi      "! #"$

Minimum-to-minimum macro

Heuristic value

Heuristic value

Minimum-to-better macros

Minimum-to-better macro

Minimum-to-minimum macros
Initial state

%& '

Goal state

Initial state

% ('

Goal state

)
* +",- .0/1234 5 5 6 7 8 9 : 8 4 ; 3<; =
8 > ?A@ 4 B? 9 ? 3 C ? 7ED"? 8 FG? ? 3H8 > ?<IEJ K J IEL IM N O M IEJ K J IEL IP: 3 @QIEJ K J IEL IM N O M
R S N N S TVU 5 8 ? 9 4 3 WAX0? 8 > ; @ 7 YVZ
> ?[\: ] 4 7
7 8 : 3 @ 7G= ; 9
8 > ?7 ? ^ 6 ? 3 C ?E; =7 8 : 8 ? 7_: 5 ; 3 WE8 > ?7 ; 5 6 8 4 ; 3
` : 8 >Y<Z
> ?Aab: ] 4 77 8 : 3 @ 7= ; 9E8 > ?0> ? 6 9 4 7 8 4 C0c : 5 6 ? 7; =7 8 : 8 ? 7 Yd : e_2f7 4 8 6": 8 4 ; 3gF
> ? 9 ?08 > ?
IEJ K J IEL IM N O M R S N N S T 7 8 9 : 8 ? W hE: C ^ 6 4 9 ? 7V7 > ; 9 8Xi: C 9 ; 78 >": 8V: 9 ?"j 6 7 87 6 k0C 4 ? 3 8V8 ;: 5 5 ; F ` 9 ; W 9 ? 7 7
4 3<8 > ?A> ? 6 9 4 7 8 4 CE7 ? : 9 C >HF
> 4 5 ?8 > ?<IEJ K J IEL IM N O M IEJ K J IEL I\7 8 9 : 8 ? W hg: C ^ 6 4 9 ? 76 3 3 ? C ? 7 7 : 9 4 5 h
5 ; 3 W0Xi: C 9 ; 78 >": 8: 9 ?A5 4 l ? 5 hi8 ;iD"?E5 ? 7 7E: ` ` 5 4 C : D 5 ? Y0d D"e_2m7 4 8 6": 8 4 ; 3<F
> ? 9 ?A8 > ?<IEJ K J IEL IM
N O M IEJ K J IEL In7 8 9 : 8 ? W h<: C ^ 6 4 9 ? 7_:EXi: C 9 ;E8 >": 8
5 ? : @ 7G= 9 ; Xb:5 ; C : 5X04 3 4 XE6 X\8 ;0:7 8 : 8 ?F
4 8 >
o O T p S d > 4 W > ? 9 e
c : 5 6 ? YVZ
> ?0IEJ K J IEL IM N O M R S N N S T 7 8 9 : 8 ? W h<: 5 F
: h 7
: C ^ 6 4 9 ? 7Xi: C 9 ; 7G8 >": 8
5 ? : @
8 ;A:E7 8 : 8 ?F
4 8 >i:ED"? 8 8 ? 9Ed 5 ; FG? 9 eGc : 5 6 ? Y
qAr"s t u . -0v- s ("w . xzy* t ut u .Q{i| }| {i~"{0    {i| }| {i~"{xi. t u"s" *  t u & t * t x & Qw . & - r - s , t . 
 - s x & xi* r * xi,x t s &H     % u * + u . - ' xi* r * xi,xgE u * A"* s w & t .  t u .AV-  t - . ,"* - . xi. r t & ( s  . 
)
* +",- .i/ % (' * w w ," t - & t .  t u * Av- s ("w . xgE  s ,-  . * t x &  t u . r w . & - r & r"s t u . -x &  - s< - s x t u .
y s -  .0xi* r * xi,xg ( , tAt u . t s t & w r ,x ( . - s  x &  - s  t * w w * r" - . &  .  r . .  w .   w  0 u .{i| }| {i~"{0
         t - & t . + H& w y &   &  ,"* - . ix &  - s  t u & t w . & t s &  t & t .0y* t u &( . t t . - % w s y_. - '  & w ,". 
 rH .  t * s"rH y_.  *   ,"   ,- t u . -  * . - . r" .  ( . t y_. . rQGG"GV & r"n V A   G  
 u .i  &  - s  &  ,"* - .  (  nGVV  % Q* r t s"r G    '& w  s - .  . x ("w . t u .ix &  - s  &  ,"* - . 
(  n V A   G   q   &  - s * 0 w s" & w w & r"s x & w s ," 
 t * r * t * & w  . +"xi. r t & vv. & -  t s x &  .
r"s v- s +"- .    ( , t0t u .< . ,". r" . &  & y u"s w .<* i- & t .  &  &   & r t & + . s ,"  % Q* r t s"r     ' 0 t * 
t u . - .  s - .v s   * ("w . t sH & w w t u .< . w .  t * s"r  t - & t . +  . x<v w s  .  (  nGVV Q }           H u * 
xi. t u"s"  y u *  us .  r"s t * r  *  t_s"r  t & - t * r + & x &  - sE - s x &Aw s" & w xi* r * xi,xgy* w wV&  ,"* - .Ax s - .
x &  - s  t u & rgt u .<xi* r * xi,x0 t s  ( . t t . -E t - & t . +  _ u .  .<x &  - s  & - . r"s tAr .  .   & - H& r" "* s w & t .
t u . .  s"r" - . ,"* - . xi. r t & ( s  . Q u . w & - + . - r ,x ( . - s  % v s   * ("w  , rr .  .   & - ' x &  - s 0y* w w
* r" - . &  . t u . ( - & r" u * r +  &  t s - & r" x &   . t . - * s - & t . t u .Ev. -  s - x & r" . s Vt u .v- s +"- & x t u & t ," . 
t u . xg
)
* +",- .ig* w w ," t - & t .  t u .  * . - . r" . ( . t y_. . rQt u . t y s  t - & t . + * .  A u * w . t u .g{i| }| {i~"{0   
     A t - & t . +  y* w wE&  ,"* - . s"r .Hx &  - sQt u & t  x s"s t u  t u .Hv & t u  t u .  }          0 t - & t . + 
&  ,"* - . Ax & r  x &  - s  t u & t y* w w , rr .  .   & - * w  * r" - . &  . t u . ( - & r" u * r +  &  t s - 
 E  G V  
 Eb  Q
 ri .  t * s"r / y_.  .  r . <t u .A   | ~  s  &  t & t . &  t u ._ u"s - t .  t +"- & v u0 *  t & r" . t s &  t & t .
y* t u &
( . t t . - % w s y_. - ' u . ,- *  t *   & w ,".  u ._- &  * ," & .  t  t u ._- .  s ,-  .  r . .  . it s  r" & r .   & v._- s , t .
 - s x &w s" & w xi* r * xi,xg< u . - . & - .i .  . - & w v s   * ("w .y &   t s .   & v.  - s x &gw s" & w xi* r * xi,xg


fi   "" H"     "  g<G   

Heuristic value

any-to-better macros

Initial state

Minimum-to-better macro

Goal state


 " Ai           i          A"  G    0                         G     	
  ff
 
0      fi
    G       G  _        V           _       ff"  fi
 
    
     G  G               V      fi
 E   	   	 "    
       <       
0  
 "      A           
i     fi

!!" $ # %  & #  "  ' )(i % $*$+!# ,$# $' )" #.-  " +!% / 0V # %#  "  ' 21 34!5*" %   " %  & +  6 7" 7"81 9 :;5 ,
"!"  " 7 %  <07$+ 7"=" 7 # ' " 6H *"$%  >ff# $' ="Q *"$%  " # % # ?A@.* B_ &   ," 7 !!" $# %  & #  "  '
  C"   #ff% *$*(i$' ' *$(<6$% " %  *$7)> *"" 7 DE7$*$7 / %   &" " FG # ' " 6G% " # H?.I;' " 7%  D% *(<" H ff# *$(i
$ # G * >% "<"   # %  'G> !7$' %  *$78- D' " F F  7"2J;K<*"9 :J;K$?ff3* % 2(i % $*$+!# ,$* B_ &   ,B." # % G(i$'
 L*" %;% *H 7$#  
 % !" %;% "g *"$% )% *E% " *$" F# % " % < #<*$6$%  (<" F ?EIE"  <F *$*$H  7"2> *";"E#  "  '
(i % $*$+% !" %B F F07$+E# * F $ %  *$7$#.C" ' H F Dg >% "ff"   # %  ';> ! 7$' %  *$7 ##  M)'   7 % F DE" ' '  " %  ,!-$%
" F # *<"! "  " 7 %   #07$+ 7"
 "G# * F $ %  *$7g &  7 >% ";"   # %  ';> ! 7$' %  *$7g #ff6!*$*" ?
I ' " (iA! 6)B % ";#  "  ' )(i % $*$+% !" %B_ ' " F F9 %   " %  & ; NV (i %  +23 421 9 N35 ?O."ff-!" #  '
6 *$'  + i #;NV (i %  +=3 4,B" ' H  % #ff" 7H 7" %  " F# % " %  ,"< *$" FP6  + ' " %  ,P")-  " +!% F  (i %GQ
" 7$+<"+ 6$% ;F  (i % RSE?P9 %6  > *" (G#"ff3 4;#  "  ' ff% *ff+ 6$% GSE?PIT" 7" &  P % ".7"! (G-  * >7$*$+ #
H  6$%E 7E(i (G*" D $'   +!#;Q<, %+ F  %  #ff% ";7$*$+G B % % ";B*" # %."   # %  'G& " F " ?O." ##  "  '
 #ff+ L   7 %>  *$(U- " (U#  "  ' ?ffNV (i %  +=3 42H   6$#ff% "GQU- # %;7$*$+ #ff* >% "G'    7 %ff+ 6$% ,
B" F ) - " (U#  "  ' 2H   6$#% "<QU- # %;7$*$+ #0  $ "  +!F  # #ff* >% "   + 6$% ?ffIT" 72QV" 6!6 *$" ' " #
 7 07" % D ,- " (W#  "  ' E- ' *$(i #ff- # % / 0V # %.#  "  ' ,!B" F G
 F  (i %  +83 4- ' *$(i #ff3 4?9 N3X' " F F #
F  (i %  +)3 40 %   " %  &  F Di! 7 %  F"  % "  "> $ F F3 4ff% *+ 6$% GSf #6  > *" (i +;*"P ".# * F $ %  *$70 #P> *"! 7$+?
O."<-  " +!% F  (i %GQ #A 7$'   " #  +2> *"_ " ' H %   " %  *$72" 7$+H #ff#  %% *)% ";& " F ") Y;Z\[ ] ,B"  < Y
 #;# *$(i;
 ' *$7$# % " 7 % ,[A #;% "<(<" " (i! (^- " 7$' " 7"
 > " ' % *"
 " 7$+8__ #;% "i %   " %  *$727"! (G-  ?GO." #
# ' " (i<"! "  " 7 %   #ff% !" %;9 N3`B F F.6  > *" (V> $ F F3 42% *+ 6$% 8Sa" > %  ff S %   " %  *$7$# ?<
 " 
b # $* B.#.% ";" F  *"  % !(?c.* % ff % !" %.% " #ff(i % $*$+g ## *$(i B!" %.#  (i F "  % *< %   " %  & ; - *$" + 7" 7"
1 dA 7$# -  ) ef@"  &  D ,g h h i 5 ,$-$ %.% "  ff % ";- *$" + 7" 7" #6  > *" (i +E" %.% ";7$*$+ff F  &  F ?.O.!" %
(i " 7$#;% !" %ff> *"ff +!*$(<"  7$#G# $ ' A" #;% ")# F  + 7" / %  F 8
 6$ j j F  #<B" ' A!" & )
 "2- " 7$' " 7"E
 > " ' % *"
 *>
F  # #% !" 7k!,$*$7$F DEki %   " %  *$7$#.B*"$ F +2-G 6  > *" (i +?

 " ff
 lA F F $ # %  " %  #.% "B." DG% !" %9 N3=B*" H # ?O."# % " % 
 " %% "% *$6i #% "F *$' " F(i 7" (i! (?
O."ff# % " % ff " %% "ffF  > %-!* % % *$( #";# % " %  B % "GF * B_ ff 1 - % %   5"   # %  'G& " F " ?O."ff# % " %  #."  
*" +   + 7<F  &  F #" ' ' *" + 7"G % *;% "   + # % " 7$' . >  *$(m% ".F *$' " F(i 7" (i! (?9 7< " ' <F  &  F% " D<"  
*" +   +)- D;% "   "   # %  '& " F "G 1 % ".F * B_ # %P& " F " % *ff% "F  > % 5 ?O."" " Dff# % " %  #"   % "_ # ' " 6
n op=q rst u v w v x y v wGz t t v u{ q |q }~ p\A  s rPz r v wff  u}  vv  t v u q |v y } rw v r  u q  v w; v u v P yG}  v|s  q |s {
u s w q z r o     ur  |vu v s r  y$ }  vPv r  s t vPu  z } vq r{  y  v uP}  s y;p vP s y.q } v u s } v}  vPs {   u q }  |\q } s{ s u  v u
po


fi !   !  8f)!!$! $
! $  ! G ff      ! $  !;
2 !   .      ff$!    $ 
 $$) $ !Vff G
   ! ! G  aff=   
         ! ! G  <!$    !ff$  !
     <    . <$    !  !  
! $  ! G    ! ! G  $    !ff$  !!;
      $   $     ff$  
  ff! 8   $!$ $        
 $$) $EWff <
ff! 8   ff!    ff! 2   
 $$) $.2 $ff8ff! 
 $$) $.ff)  ff!    $ 
  $     ff $    
    $    `      $
   !   $!  ffA  $
  
  ff! 8         $!$   $      $!  ff8  $!    ff!  
         ff!  GT   ! ! G 
  G    $   ff!    $!ff.  E< $ G!V
 $! ;!  !=        
 $$   =$$ G  ) $ $$ .$  $   G     ! G  G . ;  ).    !$         G
 )A   $.  ff   ff         ; W.    !$  < !!         G; $.  ff   ff          $ . 
 $      $      $. G  ;.$<   ff          ;!$G     $    2   $   !G     G ! 
 X$  .!       )  $W            W       W      $$ 2!  $   . < $;  $ 
!$       $;     )$  !<      E     <!  ! ff . T!$  
.$!     $      !ffG  $$<        $    .!   A  ff   P    $. !!  

 G          G.   $ ` !  $ $<^2!$   )!$<    m ;G$ E     . ! 
        .!  !      !$<   $  . $$ !     .        !$      !    ff $.!       
  $G    !) $$   m< E  $ G < $ E  8  !$  < $G$ 2G G$  !  $  
G$  $ W   P  	 
 ff  $ \.  P   <  !$  ;G$ )G$  $<!$        G     $ 
  P $;          $  $ $;   .  ;.    G!   $ G E <! $ 2E!$  < f$$ E     
 2! $ 8 ! ; G !!  E $<     8 . $)    ! $$     $ 8     $   2        
!  !    E       !G   $   !V<   GG$ ; !! $!     
   <!$       $. .     ! $  !       G      !.! $  ! . P$  $   !$   
<    G  $  =!   8 $)    !     
 fi.   A<    ;        < $      $  2    $ 



$  E     2 )! $$       2 !!    <       $ff ff   E    .!  ! ;!           
   $G !!   G   G!   $ G ; $  2 ! ff ff ;G$          )      $      !
 

fi        "!#   "!$&%(')%+*-,". .  

S (local minimum)

S' h(s')<h(s)

/10 234 5768:9<;)= > > ? @ A B C A = D ;D E-A F GIH1C JA FC ALK MNOH-D B P @ QLR1F GI@ A C A G7C A<A F GIA D S= @<A F GI> D T C >VU7= ; = UI? UQ
R1F G:@ A C A GIC A<A F GIWD A A D UX> G E A<= @<CY@ A C A G:H1= A FCI> D H-G BIZ WG A A G B [LF G ? B = @ A = T:\ C > ? G Q-R1F GI@ A C A G @
C B G:D B ] G B G ]&= ;)> G \ G > @:C T T D B ] = ; ^7A DA F G = B<] = @ A C ; T GIE B D UXA F GY> D T C >"U7= ; = UI? U)Q-K ;)G C T F> G \ G >
A F G J)C B GID B ] G B G ]&W JA F G = B<F G ? B = @ A = TI\ C > ? G7Z A F GI> D H-G @ A<\ C > ? G:A D7A F GI> G E A [ Q<R1F GI^ B C J@ A C A G @
C B GLA F G:G @ T C SGIB D ? A G Q_R1F G:^ B C J7B G T A C ; ^ > G:@ F D H1@1A F G:@ A C A G @<\ = @ = A G ]= ;A F G:> C @ A1= A G B C A = D ;D E
K MNLQ K MNH1= > > `; ]A F GLB D ? A GLH1F G ;? @ = ; ^YCIW B G C ] A F> = U7= AVD EVaYC ; ]H1= > >B G b ? = B GL> = ; G C B-A = U7G
Z a 'c c [_E D B<= A @<> C @ A1= A G B C A = D ;"Q1K deH1= > >B G b ? = B GIG f SD ; G ; A = C >VA = U7G1E D B<= A @<> C @ A1= A G B C A = D ;Z g h h
= EVA F GLW B C ; T F = ; ^IE C T A D B1= @1g [ Q

4 i 3j 53k 0 l2ilm npoq k 0 r)is5 4 q j i4 k tYu jI0 k7v30 j 5)si k k 0 om 5 w1xi yL5 z 5 4 w"j xq jI0 lpk i{57|i{)q 0 lkY0 jY0 k
o5 l5 }"r 0 q m1j i)3k 5{)q r 4 i k t
~_ +"V "     _V_& "YX"  V


{)q  i4Y q r j i47j xq j|5 j 5 4 {0 l5 kj x53j 0 m 0 j nei Y{)q r 4 i k)0 k)j x5&|5 r 0 k 0 il4 5 2q 4 |0 l2yIx5 4 5j i
3k 57j x5 {&tL:x5{)q  i4<r il j 4 0 o3j i4Lj i)j x573j 0 m 0 j nps4 iom 5 {0 lp{)q r 4 im 5 q 4 l0 l2&0 kIj x570 lr 4 5 q k 5 |
o 4 q lr x0 l2 q r j i4Li <j x57k 5 q 4 r x&24 q sxq kYq4 5 k 3m jYi <j x5q ||5 |{)q r 4 i k t  jIil575 j 4 5 {5 w"yL5
r q lq z i 0 |2 5 l5 4 q m 0  q j 0 ilq l|pq ssm npq{)q r 4 i)ilm npq jIj x57k q {57k j q j 5YyIx5 4 50 jIy:q kIq r v30 4 5 |_t
:x0 kq ss4 iq r x&y:0 m mL4 5 |"3r 5j x5r i k jYi <j x5)q ||5 |Oo4 q lr x0 l2& q r j i4Io3jYy:0 m m<q m k i4 5 |"3r 5)j x5
o5 l5 }"ji I{)q r 4 i kYk 0 lr 5j x5 npy:0 m mLo5&4 q 4 5 m nq ssm 0 r q om 5 t  jYj x5)i j x5 4Y5 j 4 5 {5 w_yL5)r q lq 0 {
 i4L 3m m12 5 l5 4 q m 0  q j 0 ilq l|q ssm nq&{)q r 4 i&q jYq l n&k j q j 5q kY0 L0 jYyL5 4 5)qoq k 0 r)is5 4 q j i4 tI:x0 k
q ss4 iq r xxq kIj x5si j 5 l j 0 q m-i <k 0 2l0 }"r q l j m np0 lr 4 5 q k 0 l2j x5o5 l5 }"jYi L{)q r 4 i k wVo3jI0 j7q m k i0 l 
r 4 5 q k 5 k1j x5:r i k j1|"4 q {)q j 0 r q m m n)o5 r q 3k 5I5 z 5 4 nq r v30 4 5 |&{)q r 4 iY0 lr 4 5 {5 l j k<j x5Io4 q lr x0 l2Y q r j i4
o nil5 tL_---V1wyIx0 r x3k 5 kYo5 k j  }V4 k j:k 5 q 4 r xVwr q lli jI3k 5Yj x5Yk 5 r il|pq ss4 iq r x&o5 r q 3k 5
0 jLy:0 m m_{)q  5:j x5:k 5 q 4 r x)s4 ix0 o0 j 0 z 5 m n&5 s5 lk 0 z 5 tL:x5 4 5  i4 5 w 0 j:3k 5 kLq7|i{)q 0 l  k s5 r 0 }"r7sq j j 5 4 l
m q l23q 2 57q l|&|i{)q 0 l  k s5 r 0 }"rq ok j 4 q r j 0 ils4 ir 5 |"34 5 kIj i)s5 4  i4 {q){i4 5Y4 5 k j 4 0 r j 5 |&2 5 l5 4 q m 
0  q j 0 ili <{)q r 4 i k tL0 lr 50 lO V"_ Y   - OyL5Yj 4 0 5 |pj iq z i 0 |&|i{)q 0 l  k s5 r 0 }"rs4 ir 5 |"34 5 k w
yL5Lj iiIj x5Lk 5 r il|)q ss4 iq r xYi " 3m m2 5 l5 4 q m 0  q j 0 ilVt1/"i4 j 3lq j 5 m n w j x5:x0 m m  r m 0 {o0 l2k 5 q 4 r x75 {7
sm i n 5 |&o n)j x5Ys4 iom 5 {k i m z 5 4<0 lO V"_ Y   - p|i5 kIli j<k 3 _5 41 4 i{j x5I5 j 4 5 {5I0 lr 4 5 q k 5
0 l&k 5 q 4 r xj 0 {5q k:q)4 5 k 3m jIi 1j x5Y0 lr 4 5 q k 570 l&j x57o4 q lr x0 l2) q r j i4 t
 g 

fi_ "     (" "

_ &  VeO V"_ Y   - e V)_-  <p_p" 
_O 
    )
 L
L
L

O V"_ Y   - X       e    "p)  VL       : O)        "
    Y    _
    &  L       I)    V     
  :       L  :    Y    Y     &    :    L    YL 
L                    

_ 7V    V 7"7O V"_ Y   - 

        :      I   I       ::  )     &I &7    	 
-      ff fi  
    
   I                7     LY   :    &             &   
      &           O 7V   <  O )       )       && )   
         
V 	
 &                  &       V  &   
      )   I:         : &    V


!#" $ % & $ ' (*)  & !$) ,+ $ - . /1012 . 3  $ % & $ 4 $ - . /1012 . 3  $ & $ '  516
V 87p7L                   &:  &7V      :9<;   *= 9<;8>@? A 7B $  ? $<)
*C:? DFE   V G 77 )   Y  <  )      : V:=     <
      G  IY )   
         :  e      H FI       1 p       )        
  H ? ,? JLKM  9<7
; I  KX
M  I Y    V      )    : NG 
O  V" P
    &              " L7  7         &
  7 )      I 
 &    &
G   7V7    I:        7   7I   :  L <  ) Y   Y   Y     L     
=  <
7  <L        _" )   I : <IV  Y 1       :9<;  L:  )) Q : L  
9<)
;    7   )     p)  -    7:  H7B $  >@R Y Y    &
    V_  L  I    VL

   1 )   )     I O  - ))    Y   7V p   Y) Q  Y      
:     Y Y    _ L      :       I Y  H ? ,? JLKM  9<; *S
TU	VWXY[Z \ ]^Y:_a` \ _bcN\ ` d@e^f gBhBi*j kf l[l:m*h[n
_O     _
o         &    O V"_ Y   -        &:L&         :  e  
    7)   <p   I          7L  )      1q q  ))    :)   
     Y p  7)    Lr:VBsY tu"va w 1 xy z {1 _              pI  
  ) 
    H|     }  :)           V_I  pL   )  V V 7     Y & 
  O     ff fi ff   O I
~     ff ff R   :          Y         I  7  
    p             V
      1 I       7   Y      7         
    O             V         &V  L      X   V  p      &     )   
V  <   I  < L <    I 7  <       V   p      7     I    1      
 Y ) 
             L   )  "       : &1q q   
    
  fi ff 

   fi  
 R       
  ff  R    


fi   11: :N:1::   ::: [H :H1: : [H::,@	B[   
1        *1    	 # 1* :   [ 1 :    1    1    1*  B 1	:11   * #8 :
 1*     <1  	   1 : 1    1	 *:   1   11	 1	:11  <  1H ::    :     1 
  *  	 1	  :    :   1: *:1 1  	 1	:11  <  1H ::    :    1    *  
 1F 1N 	1 L ::   # N:^1  :1   1F          F    , 1:         	   
1 :   1	 18    8       1 81 :       1 1:     1   1	 :1   #:     #81  
 	:1  :  :    1L 	 	# :     F        L#  	: 11 N  1 1H     , 1,   : 1 
   :1    , *    	  : 11 ,:  #:  1    	   1 1N 1	:1      H    8       1
 1 #1 :      #H#  *   N  :1    1  8 18  1 81 :     	 :1   11 1  < 1# : 
H ::     	:     1    
H     H:      1H 1 ::   #    #  11:    H1  a 1 1   11  ,: 
    1  1,  1< ::   #   <:   1 # a
B @BB:  [[ [*1 aa [[
    1* ::   #   *:        N1   11    B8    1 1	::  8 1	<     1::   1
    1 1	:    #    1       [a <   B *BH  *    #     1 1::  8 ::   
   B F    1 <:1     1 , 1H:    #1 1 	 1#    1 1:    #  #  1     
  [1a: 1<
  :1 1   *,  :  #       1 1H     1     #  NH         1   1
	    N    H     1H 1,:            1  1,	    < 1<   1 1HN   #  ,


:    # @  1:1     :       1     N , 1  #	 :1  8	    1 1,:    ,
1#11 : a   1 	  1#  1   * 1	  1:1  :1 1  1:    1  :1     1# 1 
      a[1a     1<**1  	  1:1^  :1 1   [  1  ,    :    8 1 :  : B 1*:     #
    	        H:  1 N 18          1:1	 [1 1	   : 1     N:1	  1 a 1,   
:    #*  ,  1     F1  1LH11 8:1	    : : 1:  N#  11 1#      1  1:1
       :     # 1  1    1 1   1111        	  1:1:  #1    11# 8 1 1 
    # 1H   : 1< 1  <   :  #1    11#:1	     :   [,#  11H:1 1 <:  
 1  1      N  [a <   B L   1 # <  <1  11  , 1# ::   #     <1  #  11 
    #1 , 1	:  # 1   1      1   [a <   B F , 1   1      1  
  1 <        1   <^1       1N#1: a*	     [a <   B F      :#  1 1  
# 1 	 18*:,1 <     8 ,  :1  # 1 @	    #    1#1        : 1  [:  # 
 1: ,  	[1   * 1	 ::   #   #:      F H 1 	: :   [a <   B     , 
    ,  * 1,:    ##81  N H     1H#1:  1    1  1 :    8: 1:  1H    1 1  
[       11@   11    [[1 1  a   a1       : *  <1        8*      : 
 1N:1     1 H   	   N [a <   B   111      # 	 N  N H     H:    #
  111     1	  1 # N   1  B# 1 	:*1   11 [       [1  8 1<      111 :  
  B 1 1:   # 1  # 1 #:        1 1[
a : 
	fiff B [ 
H<#   : < :  <  :    B 18    1 1: 1     1   1:   * 11 :# ,[:  1	    1 1[
 1< :            8  1   1   1,	   	  8 1,  81     


              N1   1:    11 :# F[:  1L 1,    1 1F: 1   ,:   8 1
    1 1 1   :   : N : # ,:     1 F 1111  , : 	 1,:1     1 : 
  #     11 [     N a   * 18    1 1,   1:    1 11 *   1< 1 1 8:   #   
! "#$ % & ')( *,+ - ' . / 0 ' +21 3 '2' 4 $ . 15 ' 0 6 / 1 / 7 687 91 3 / +9 : 6 . 1 / 7 6;9 7 <1 3 '2= ' 6 ' < $ &>?;>fi. $ + ' "
@AB

fiCD EFG H I JG D EKMLONPFQRD JST
U VW X Y Z [ Y [OX Y [ \]X W YOW \V[ ]^8_` U \V
a,b]`8Z c [ \dY W X Y Z [ Y [8` eYOc U f Y c U e\\d` eZ `` eYg_X \bc Y ^
[ \ c h Y X,i)U c cY VW \]V ` Y X)Zc \W Z c^U VU ^]^jd]X U VkO` Y [ ` U Vkl
mo_n
X p \q br sc Y r ^
s tvi)u
U p ` wegx y ` z e{vU [;| }vdY ~ _eY Y8Vd` Y\ V ` Z`;c2h VZ ]X U ^Z bbc Y Y8X;U \[)` e_ZX \`)bU c`Y ^U k[vV\[ X \ Y c [h Y ` deYvd`]U X ^U VYkU V ` hX Z Y U[ V` UY VdkUl V~ ` eeYY
[ Y Z X W egZ Vdg` eY;` U ^YvU V h Y [ ` Y dU Vgk Y VY X Z ` U Vk8` X Z U VU Vkg_X \bc Y ^[ l
mU Vu_z pX q\ bw c p;Y ^q u u
k Y y r V Y q X  Z r w ` sU \| V}2U [U V` W eYvYO` Z e_Yv_bc U Z W [ Z U `W;U \\V_Y \ X )Z ` ZU \bVOZ `[ eU WOZ `,\_U [;Y X ]Z [ ` Y \dXb` \\` eOZOU[ VO` Z [ ` Y Y Z aX i,W egYOZ ]V[ d Y
` eYv` \ ` Z cV]^bY X\ \_Y X Z ` \XZ __c U W Z ` U \V[Z [;` eY_X U VW U _c Y^Y Z [ ]X Y ^Y V `) \X)` eY
c Y Z X VU VkgX Y [ \]X W Y [)W \V[ ]^Y dl
 q  p w  | z 2|  q  r |  r  | }2 ` Z ` U [ ` U W [Z b\]`)` eYvW eZ X Z W ` Y X U [ ` U W [)\ 2` eY;k Y VY X Z ` Y d^8Z W X \8[ Y ` l
mon
w  q ys{8x z p }2~ eY` \ ` Z c
V]^bY X\ 2^8Z W X \ [,Z W ]U X Y dgd]X U Vk8` eYc Y Z X VU Vk8[ Y [ [ U \V
l
m  z q sgz s t }2~ eYvZ h Y X Z k Y;c Y Vk ` eO\ Z8^8Z W X \l
m ^8 Z q gU ^y z ]s ^t }~ eYOl ^8Z U ^]^jc Y Vk ` e\ )Zg^8Z W X \l ~ eU [vh Z X U Z bc YOZ __X \ U ^8Z ` Y [;` eY
pq  r |
 ^8nZ z)W X \  [)r y dr  Y ;_w Y )Vd[;z\q Vg  ` er Yvp z W ;\ {[ `)q \  p w ` | e}Yv [ YW WZ \X W X eOdU Vik;eY` \;V2][ U ]VZ kO` U ` \eVvY ^ga l ` eY,e]Y ` X U Y c U `\X Y \ a\` ]eX)Y)_Z XW U V]W U U X _Y c d Y
dY _Y VdY V `h Z X U Z bc Y[ e\]c d^Y Z [ ]X Yv_X \bc Y ^v [ \ c hU Vkg[ _Y Y dl ~
m)2 `  rU ^{Yvz },[ ~_Y eV Y`)^d]\ X[ U`,V\kgb [ hY U Z\X]W [e
W lZ )Vd\ i,U dY Z h ` Y Y;X a\[ X)]W ^eY Z8Z [ ^]X Y U ZV[ kg]_X Y X ^\bY c V Y `)^vU  [[ \ \ c h hY U XVc kgg[ Z _Y Y Y W d` Y U d [
b OU X X Y c Y h Z V `) Z W ` \X [,[ ]W eZ [)eZ X di)Z X Y  a[ \  ` i)Z X Y;Z Vd_X \ kX Z ^8^U Vk8]Z c U `  l
mW\ ^8uq ^s\ Vz ^sY w `  ez \| d}v~ \eXYg^VY ]Z ^[ ]bX Y U XvVk\ [ Y VZ \X dW Ye[[ Y _Y _Y ZdVlfidY )dY h dY ]X X` U eVY kc Y `[ e[ aYO` [ eY U Z [OX W ^e
Y l Z [ ~ ]eX UY [^U Y[8V Z `
^8Z bY8^U [ c Y Z dU VkU V` eYW \V ` Y `\ ,^8Z W X \  c Y Z X VU Vka[ U VW Y8` eYbX Z VW eU Vkg Z W ` \X
U VW X Y Z [ Y [ieY VgZ W ]U X U Vk^8Z W X \ [ l
m^)zY sV `)z p ` q Z  f z Y8[,sU Vw ` \Oz | Z }W ~ W \e]YvV V`)]` ^eYvbY U VX)W \ X Y Z V[ \Y ddY [bX k Z Y VVW Y eX U Z V` k8Y dg Z dW ]` \X U X VakOb][ Y `)Z U X `W e
dl\Y ~ [eVU [;\ `^Z Y W Z W [ \]]X V Y `
 \X;` eYgeU keY XW \ [ `v\ )k Y VY X Z ` U VkZV\dYb Z^8Z W X \d]Yg` \` eYgZ __c U W Z ` U \V\ 
[ Y h Y X Z cbZ [ U Wv\_Y X Z ` \X [ l
m)u\ `z Y;p q `  ew Z p)`q ui,u
Y;y r W  \q ] r V w `sY| h }2Y ~ X eYZ V_]_^c U W bZ Y ` X2U \\ V
a
Z U _V_W c c ]U W dZ U ` VU \kV` [)e\ \ [ YvZvibZ e[ U WU We\Z _X Y YX Z _` Z \X X`)` \ \v,Z;^8[ Z ` W Z X ` \ Y  l
\_Y X Z ` \X [vZ Vd` e\ [ YOieU W e Z U c l ~ eU [U [8` eYO_X U VW U _c YdY _Y VdY V `8h Z X U Z bc Y aZ [U `
X Y _X Y [ Y V ` [^\ [ `)Z W W ]X Z ` Y c g` eYv_X \bc Y ^v [ \ c hU Vkg[ _Y Y dl
m]
[ w Y y dO br w 8sOZ  V\q y_r ` U ^}2U  U ZVWkX \[ Y  cZ Y X Z W X e8VU_VX kv\W U [)Y dV]\ X `Y8Z; [ ]Z U ` X Z f b\ c hYU ` ` W Y evW eVU ,]\ Y;[ diY ]e`Y [ VW e` eY XYa^8  Z  W  X \  [lZ X YY
Z X Y)[ ` U c c
U V ` Y X Y [ ` Y dae\ i,Y h Y X a U V8` eY]Z c U ` 8\ ` eY[ \ c ]` U \V8\b` Z U VY dl2Y;^Y Z [ ]X Y
` eY;]Z c U ` g\ ` eYv[ \ c ]` U \Vb OU ` [)c Y Vk ` egU VbZ [ U Wv\_Y X Z ` \X [ l
  ; , ;           v      )

     ,  ,     ,     2  ;    ; v       ) 
     ,       ;     ,   
       ;vv 2
 , ,  8  ,  ,  
         
   v               


fi    O       gM8j   
   

  

  	  	
ff fi  fi  fi  fi           
    	    
ff fi 	
   	    fi fi    

!"# $ %   	

  fi        &  '#$ ()       ' fi)        *
+-,/. 0 . 1 2 3 4 56	. 2 74 89
:<; 3 5"3 6	=6> 2 4
: ; 3 5"3 6	=6> 2 4
<
:PO 5"Q > 2 4 > ? . 2 2 .

  DEF   fiG
> ? . 2 2 . @ *A
ff  fi       fiB
	   C/fi &
M        fiN
	  
> 6	3 5"3 6	=6 *#H$F# 
ff  
	 fi     fi #I JLK
M        fiB
	  
@ *H$F 
ff  
	 fi     fi #ISR





 


+-T$. =@ 3 U 2 3 1AV =5"1 2 3 4 5/9




*A	 F     $ Ffi   fi      S   
 F     	'  F     
fffi fi 
:<W 4 XL> ? Q > @ 4 XL> Y *A
 F     )          fiN #     fiB 
:<W . 8 =1 2 3 4 5 *ZP       fiB A 
C/  ff  '[  fiS    ff   F
fffi/[#  fiS    fi\  '[  fiS    fi\ B   
   F
fffi   A  F     	'  F      N ] ^ _ ` ` a b
 F     	     $ )    fiN     $ fiBff    
: , c/3 @ d 0 *AZe       fiN A 
  A  
PF    fi/
: ,/=6> 4 V > ; d 57d 2 2 d 5> 8 3 U 2 d 5"1 . U *fB F
g 	 Bh& fi    fif    fi  B  '#  fi
   )   	 fiN      fi   fiS^ '  $ fi   B i b
:












+-j$4 6	d 3 5/9 hB  	   %   
	 fi  )      k  N'#  N    
	 f fif &_ l m Fn n  

ff  fi/Bo '#    [L'#)  )    \I J Rp q
r  fi&      A   
ff  fi Bs fif  
 $
ff  fi ["  fi           $  fi     BF  fi $
ff  fi m  fi  fi" fi     fi fi m
   
t  fi    A'  N    ff  fi
P  EF fi 	 L      	   /    

 


   

Y u> c/= v v 0 . 9 l	wNl	    fi   	Fn n  
: x z > 1 d 5"5"3 ? d 0 U 9 $  fifi    fiN
	    fi    $   
{^ |    fi/[_ ` } a b ff
ff ( 
y
 fifi m       ['#F 	_ a$  fifi   $ fiN_ a	
	    fi    # fi      $F F /G	 fi
Gf_ a  fifi    fik_ aB
	    fi    )  )   F   ffi&  '#B fi( 	 $B    
 N
	F $  ff
	   Nfi  fffi	      fi(" N  fiNF ff) '  N  fi
  fffiL '#   fi A  fifi   # F fi   AF fiF
	  
	    fi    
fiN    	 fi(")) F     ) Ffi   fi&F  S  )fiF
	 $    fi    
fi #       Nfi) $      fi("
:yx z > U 2 4 5". U 9 ZeFn n  	       N fiN|    fi M (&^ _ ` } a b ~s fi     AF  fi)G
   (  fi $ fiBG)'  	  fi '#	F ffl)   (  fi $ fi&lff'  	  fi  $
ffZP  fi)
ff B
	  	 fi  
  L fi C"F    fiB           
 fiN      fi $ 
ff    
ff NN   fi	 '#ff     fi  fi  N fi 
ff 
    B) F     ) Ffi   fiSF  S 	 fiF
	 $   fi 	fi    fi&     
     fi/
:y > T$d 5"4 3 9 ff '#   o fi    
'  &l)  fi  fiB fi      fiN  n   ff  
  $Gff  $ fiNlff  fi  A$       fiN  	l	  fi $    Nfi) $   $ "
Z<  fiB
ff B
	   B  	 B  fi   $ B    S    	fi 	    
fi	 
ff      fi ff   F  A F      Ffi   fiNF  N  fiF
	  A  fi 
fi #      Bfi)   #      "
:

  

fi "     &P)" "

  A$  Nff  
  A    # B 	  N  t      L         N )ff  $ &  
           A      A          #  L /   A     A   /  /
&   BA            $  Nff  )     N   	      $ 
 	/B)  )  < $          N ff        /#  	ff   
  N  
ff ff   	   ff  $ 	S   S     A     S         $ ff  
 	    $ B   	   #$  / L     ff       <ff   $   
ff   ) f  y   B     -      g N   ~      - N 
   	ff        ")   "   
L <"  /S \// /& /L "&	 f /S /  S)B" 
"  /\ff   
 "/  -~"  /

         
B  
     
   /	
B  
   


  
 
    
 
  

Ak  
B  
  
B  /
B  
  


 

  
 
 

A  
B  
 
& )/
B  
 

	
 
 
  
 
 

L  ) #      	ff
 fi	 	     
 ff	 
      
    
      
    
 
              
 
 	     ! !  " 
   #      	    $      
 $  " % %"            
   ##  
 ff 

  	
 fi	 	       	 	  	  	   	   "
 fi	       	  &   
  	 '  $      (
 $  	 ) % %
 	      * #

 #   #    	             ,+.- /102,3 4- 5 5 6ff0 7)     $       ff  /

L  #   #     	      # 	 ff            A       	    $       
      &   	     ff $     ff           $ ff ff    $    ff  
     t     #     $     &ff    # ff          t       

89%

fi: ; < ;=>@? A@;&B)C@=D@E@F < ; C@D@G@? GHJI E@DJ:E@< A@? GHJ>@K@;(LNMLPOffQR R < ;
S T"U.V W1XY,Z [V \ \ ]ffX ^J_` a bcdaa bef e g h ie jlkic _f e j@m eg ij(_` a b(f e g h i` im)a d@h ie j&c nT
o@Tpe q a r s1h q aq e g h t budq ` im)a bev"wJbe d@h ` q a ` t T
x@Tpe q a r s1h q aq e g h t b(dq ` im)a beX1XJbe d@h ` q a ` t T
yTzJe ` mb a e jr {|_` a b&a bev"w}be d@h ` q a ` t TzJeq e f e t a e j.g(icj@ee ~ g f d@g a ` ci& d@it a ` ciJ 1
 S}" ff 11"ff 1_` a blN@  @@_"b` t bl_g qh e @ch a e jl l"ch  S   x g q"a be@e q a
_e ` mb a cha beJS  r @d  f e(j@cg ` i "ch "dq e qa be)e @d` ~ g f e i a(ic a g a ` ci. 1ff 1
 ff 1_` a b)zx  T
@T "{|(_` a b.a be&v"wbe d@h ` q a ` t T}` it el_e(dq e jh g ij@c@h cf e qm e ie h g a e j}dq ` im.a be
q g e&e a bcjg q)"ch  _e&dq e ja be&h e q df a q(h e @ch a e j` i "ch  "S   x  Tbelid@@e h
c "c@e h g a chg @f ` t g a ` ciq ch"ch   qjg a g&_g qe q a ` g a e j@g q e j}ci.a be(h g a ` c.@e a _e e i
m e ie h g a e j&icj@e qg ij(c@e h g a chg @f ` t g a ` ciq` i(cd@hh d@i(c @e q a r s1h q a"q e g h t b1T
ffg f eo"q bc _qffa beh e q df a qc 1a b` qe @@e h ` e i a Tbeh e q df a qg h eg ~ e h g m e jc ~ e h,a beS  @h cf e q
` ila bea e q aq e a Tbe)h e q df a q" chU.V W1XY,Z [V \ \ ]ffX ^g  a e h"f e g h i` imlg h eg f q clg ~ e h g m e j&c ~ e h"a be
S  f e g h i` im(q e q q ` ciq T
     
 
        
      

   
B)? =D@E@F ? < < C@D 
         u u
              
B)? =D@E@F ? < < C@D 


             
     u  u 
     
  
            
     
 D@D
         

. 
         

 
      

       
1      
1
     


   
    
        
   
            
                                                 




  

 

  

         

                     
                 
          
      

  u         u
     
        u 

                     

       
  

ffg f eo@  )      & "  )                )        )       J        (  )      l  
      )  )                                        "         (     
  )       " l                   B)? =D@E@F ? < < C@D            &  )   
              "       "        
U.V W1XY,Z [V \ \ ]ffX ^g  a e hfff e g h i` imq c f ~ e q@h cf e qdt b g q a e hffa b@g ia bec a be hg f m ch ` a b@q T
 adq e q)S a ` e q" e _e h"c@e h g a ch"g @f ` t g a ` ciqa b@g il@e q a r s1h q aq e g h t bldq ` im&a bev"wbe d@h ` q a ` t 
_` a blq c f da ` ciqc t c@g h g f ef e im a b1T( _et c@g h ea be)Na ` ec "@e q a r s1h q aq e g h t bla c
 1       1       1            "            ff  
	1,  "           "   ff fi"   
    ff  
 	1 ff     ff  
ff              fi ff  ff ff fi 	       1            fi"       
 
	  
 1   fi   
    	ffff ff fi  1   ff        ,              ff  	  "  ff  ff    
fi        ff .  
   1     
        fi 
 

fi
      "!$#&%'() *+

, -. ,0/ 13254 678
9 :34 ; ; <7 =?>A@&B . C"D @ @&, -. ,E254 678
9 :34 ; ; <7 =?F DEGH/I @E, -. CKJ L LM, F GH@ D01 . D , @ I
, -. C&N@ D , O PI D ,AD @ . I B -QRS-F DAF DTN@ B . UD @0N@ D , O PI D ,AD @ . I B -E-. DS. CE/ V @ I -@ . W&X@ IY @ C@ I . , @ WMC/W@
>T-F B -"F DEGHUB -5-F Y-@ I0, -. C5254 678
9 :34 ; ; <7 =AZ D Q [\254 678
9 :34 ; ; <7 =]. ^ D /"-. D0, -@M. WV . C , . Y @
/ 1H.5V @ I _`D GE. ^ ^3D , . CW. I WKW@ VF . , F /CQa254 678
9 :34 ; ; <7 =$. 1 , @ IE^ @ . I CF CYKF Dcb d d", F GH@ D&1 . D , @ I
, -. Ce254 678
9 :34 ; ; <7 =`N@ 1 /I @0^ @ . I CF CYQT254 678
9 :34 ; ; <7 ="F D3f gH, F GH@ DS1 . D , @ I, -. CMhci0j0>SF , kml bnNU,_F @ ^ WDSD / ^ U, F /CD, -. ,A. I @A, >SF B @3. D^ /CYQA254 678
9 :34 ; ; <7 =eF DSGH/I @S, -. CMJ n L L Ln L L L
, F GH@ D1 . D , @ I, -. C&o pTi0j3>SF , -ED / ^ U, F /CDS, -. ,A. I @3dQ q3, F GH@ DA^ /CY @ I3r , -. CE, -@T/X, F GE. ^D / ^ U, F /CD
1 /UCWcN _Mo pTi0j s Q
p0UI F CY`, -@", @ D , F CYKX-. D @ nH254 678
9 :34 ; ; <7 =$C@ V @ IM@ CB /UC , @ I @ W]^ /B . ^HGHF CF GE.QaRS-UD n
. B B /I WF CY0, /TW@ PCF , F /CeJ n . ^ ^, -@AD @ , D/ 1
GE. B I / D^ @ . I C@ W&N _E254 678
9 :34 ; ; <7 =e>A@ I @S. XX. I @ C , ^ _
t u vSwx y z y QRS-F DS>S. DT. ^ D /E, -@3B . D @3>SF , -M, -@0I @ D ,S/ 1, -@3@ {X@ I F GH@ C , DTW@ D B I F N@ WcF CM, -F D3X. X@ I Q
h"@e-. V @&, I F @ W?UD F CY5F , @ I . , F V @MW@ @ X@ CF CY|r o p0s01 /I0@ D B . X@eF CD , @ . WK/ 10o }
~TQh"@eUD @ W?. C
F GEXI / V @ WcV @ I D F /Ce/ 1So p, -. ,T, @ D , D3@ . B -cC@ >\D , . , @H. Y. F CD ,3, -@HD , . , @ D3. ^ /CYM, -@EX. , -e, /&, -@
I // ,A, /&. V / F WM^ //XD QR. N^ @HbHD -/ >SDS, -@0I @ D /UI B @ DTB /CD UGH@ WMWUI F CY&^ @ . I CF CYQSR. N^ @0ED -/ >SD
, -@SD , . , F D , F B D/ 1
, -@TGE. B I /0D @ , D. B UF I @ W
QiTD@ {X@ B , @ W
n^ @ . I CF CYH>SF , -&o }
~`F D1 . D , @ I, -. CH>SF , o pr N _c.E1 . B , /IS/ 1Sg s nNU,0XI /WUB @ DEGE. B I / DT, -. ,0. I @HD ^ F Y- , ^ _"^ /CY @ I&r o p$PCWD0, -@ED -/I , @ D ,
@ D B . X@HI /U, @ D s Q

 D B . X@HGH@ , -/W
o }
~
op

 X@ I . , /IS. XX^ F B . , F /CD
c@ . C
 , W
Q
g qn J  d
    
n f f bn bJ g
    [ 

S]D @ B /CWD
c@ . C
 , W
Q
 b f

dn f d


I /N^ @ H
G D
c@ . C  , W
Q
 L
 
 L
 

R. N^ @HbA H
        E        H     0 e   0       E e  M        H  H  &    &      
    T0       
  H  3          A  S0  3   S  S
        3        

 D B . X@HGH@ , -/W
o }
~
op

R / , . ^
CUGHN@ I


c@ . C
, W
Q
J Q J 
  
J Q b g
  

c@ .
 @.
c
qQ b
qQ J

CM}@ CY , C
, W
Q
q
  
d
  

". {&}@ C Y , c@ . C  , W
Q
J qQ L
 
J Q L
 

R. N^ @0A E
        0
  A  EH   &   E       c  c      3    &0      "
  "  3 
         S  A
 0  0   S  S       

 H"AA HT 5    
?| 
K
K 
 
h"@", @ D , @ W|254 678
9 :34 ; ; <7 =$>SF , ?
- , -@"GHF CF GHUG0O , / O GHF CF GHUG. CW|. C _ O , / O N@ , , @ I&D @ ^ @ B , F /C
D , I . , @ Y F @ D QeRS-@&^ @ . I CF CY5I @ D /UI B @ H
D B /CD UGH@ W`. I @&D -/ >TCcF C`R. N^ @MfQcRS-@&D , . , F D , F B DH/ 1S, -@
 0   S       A       0               T  S S                    S  S   T    
    e        0      
   c    
 

fi    e&    " "  "
	 	  

ff fi    ff fi     ff      "!ff #$ %&!'(  )  ff fi * )+ ( #$  ,  $ -  .  /
   .ff fi   '    !ff #$ 0&
1 (  ff  'ff (($  fi ff    2'3546  fi  35 #$  
7  $  fi      
7  9& 8  ff  7  9& 8  ff  7  9&
8 ff
8   .:   : #    
;< => ? 0 @
A B CD B A 0 E F
GHI
% J B KG
8   .:   :    @ @> @? ? > ;F J G A C D L M C N I G F> ;%? O C G L I ;@ % B N B K D
P  Q :   : #    
F 0 @> % @ @
H H A C N N D %? =
NMG
% F L KN
!ff #$ FR+SUT VW V X Y Z [ Z \Y V ] ^ _ Y ` V ]` ^ Z ] _ a.V bcUT [ W V.W V X Y Z [ Z \[ Zd T Ve f g h _ i i W Vb ^ aX [ Z*_ ] [ Z \*j X Y [ ^ _ ]
] V W V ` d [ ^ Za.V d T ^ b ] kml9X ` TZ _ aonV YUY V h Y V ] V Z d ]+d T V'a.V X Zo^ j V Y'e p p'W V X Y Z [ Z \o] V ] ] [ ^ Z ] k
!9  ff $m#  8  ff qm /   8rff sqm /  
7  $  fi      
8  ff  7  9& 8  ff  7  9& 8  ff  7  9&
8   .:   : #    
? ;
& ? % D K A B =& E = D K G D ? =& J D K D
8   .:   :    ? J ;
& J ; L I K L G ? J <& < J L D K N I E ;=& ; H A G K I
P  Q :   : #    
;@& J % B K B N =& @ J D K H O ? =& J D K N
!ff #$ %R+SUT Vo] d X d [ ] d [ ` ]'^ tUd T VoaX ` Y ^] V d ]X ` u _ [ Y V bcU[ d T*j X Y [ ^ _ ]+] V W V ` d [ ^ Za.V d T ^ b ] k.l9X ` TZ _ aonV Y
Y V h Y V ] V Z d ]'d T V+a.V X Z.^ j V Y'e p p'bX d X nX ] V ] k
1 (  ff   vUs(ff  
7  $   
2'354
ff (($  fi ff   
 
  fi 
$  /  
7  $  fi   
8  ff  7  9& 8  ff  7  9& 8  ff  7  9& 8  ff  7  9&
8   .:   : #    
% = = G H ;0& ; H K N J& E J D K D H ? ;<& F D K H L
8   .:   :    ? @ =? N N G ;E& F G K H J& = ; D K H G @ F? & F O D K D I
P  Q :   : #    
? E < % H N G ;%& ; D K A J& E < D K D N ? ;E& = N K G D
!ff #$ 0R+SUT V._ d [ W [ d w^ t5d T V.W V X Y Z V baX ` Y ^ ]'cU[ d Tj X Y [ ^ _ ]'] V W V ` d [ ^ Za.V d T ^ b ] kSUT V.Y V ] _ W d ]oX Y VoxY ] d
X j V Y X \ V br^ j V Yod T Ve p p*h Y ^ n W V a.]o[ Z d T Vd V ] d.] V dX Z b d T V Z"X j V Y X \ V b"X \ X [ Z^ j V Y.d T Ve p p
aX ` Y ^] V d ] k
'!      $  ofi  ym ff ff $ Q  o  (  - o  fi   m&o!'  .:   :   
   ff   / Q.ff fi    5ff fi    ff Uff  ' fi    ff   $ Q$ /
> fi ff   /ff'$ ff  / + fi   ff  '  +$  ff   /
    fi       9& P $  
>U# fi ff   *ff fi   ff  $ /   >U  Qrff  $   /    ff $+ff "ff  Q
 )'  ,ff  ff fi    # )  *   fi  fi  & !'ff  Q :   : #    o   ff   / Q ff fi     fi    ff  Q
ff fi    > fi $  ff  *ff.$ ff  /  '# ff fi  /) ff fi  'ff $  + '  $   Q &
z{|

fi}9~ 
    ~ r*
~ 

 mr++ 
 mr
9     U9   99U
 9 m
''" m
9 o    *      6 U   .o +          . 
        o       
    r     o'  m*'*      *             r      r    
  '  . *   U       '           r           
              ' o      .    o  9   +            
 .       5" m
9 o    +Uro   
   "  o     *           
     '     * 5       .    o      r     
   5   .
* " 
  6 .     '    9
     '        '56    5   
'      
 
 9      9      9
m
    
    
   
   
+ +      +  
                           
+ 
   
           
 
   
   
                  
    
                                    

  +U                     . U   .                     *          
                 
	9    fiff          '  +.  .   '  '               
9   9     m    r m   
'      
     9      9      9
m
 
                   
+ +      +                      
+ 
   
                    
   
 
                  
                      

  +U          '      o          *U        5                 	9  *  fiff 
         '  +.  .   '  '   ff    
'   +      +       r            . rm                
        r  .       *     "  '      "  r     
            * "      r       6'    r +            
  mm     * *   o     +  m    * +     
       m5'.  + 
      o         +   9      
 ''.            '           *  .    o  o  '   m
       
''o     *          .   + +  +   . 5     5       ' 
 .   o  ''  *          


fi   ! "!$#%!&!'!(   %!&!)! )+*, '!&'! "! )+*!-!./0.2143+5 5  
6fi7!8 9 : ; <9
=?>!7!: @A!8 A
BCED
F< G H; I <@
: 7!7G I J : ; I <@K
@<A!8 K
K 8 J <@A!K
G 8 @L ; M
8N H!9 I K ; I J
OP8 : @ F; A
Q OP8 : @ F; A
Q OP8 : @ F; A
Q OP8 : @ F; A
Q
RSR
TUU
V W XY Q X W Z [ \ Q ] \ ^ Z ^ W _ X` Q a ^ Z W b
c < de f g e 9 < de h h!i U h Y V W a Y Q h X W j j Z k _ Q ] ] [ Z l ^ _ XU Q h ^ Z W b
c 8 A+HJ ; I <@
Y]U
W b X h!Q T Y ^ Z j \ Q h ` ^ Z ^ W _ h a!Q a W Z l ^
F!7I 9 : G
`XX
[ j X X Q Y T ^ Zm \ Q ] Y ^ Z^ V _ ] \ Q _ m ZV n
op
_ _ i a h \ W ^ ^ b _ Y a!Q \ \ k [ Z l h!Q X\ ^ Z ^ W _ X h!Q \ V Z ^ j
q : f G 8 _ \!rs?t u4v w x y x w z{ |w t u4y u } ~  u fi}  ~ { +?x w t } ~ x { v St u v ~ x  w x 
| v   w x {   +s?t u?~ u  { v ~  u 4~ u  v x ~ u 
| { ~fi { y  x  w t uw u  w x  $ u w { } ~ u P?x w tP } ~ x { v  {   y u } ~  x   ~ {  y u 2 { y  u ~  s?t u
~ u  v y w } ~ u~  w}  u ~ }  u 0{  u ~?w t u   ~ {  y u ?x w t uw u  w u w}  w t u }  u ~ }  u }  } x 
{  u ~?w t ufi  }  ~ { u w  
q <H!@A!8 9 K ; : @A; M89 8 : K <@K0 <9; M8 K 8PA!I 
8 9 8 @J 8 Kd8PJ : @G <<: ;; M8PK ; : ; I K ; I J K< ; M8
: J !HI 9 8 A0: J 9 < K q : fG 8 `  Q q M8; < ; : G!@H!f!8 9?< 40: J 9 < KE: J !HI 9 8 AdI ; M op I Ka \ ; I 8 KEG : 9 L 8 9
; M!: @; M8@H!f!8 9< 0: J 9 < K: J !HI 9 8 APdI ; M RSR QG : 9 L 8 9@H!f!8 9< E0: J 9 < KI 07G I 8 K:0G : 9 L 8 9
f!9 : @J MI @LP : J ; <9 i4dMI J M8 >!7G : I @K0; M8G < d8 98 J I 8 @J g< ; M87!9 <fG 8 K < G  8 9HK I @LP; M8 op
0: J 9 < K Q q M8MI LMG 8 : 9 @I @L9 8 K <H!9 J 8 KJ : @f!88 >!7G : I @8 Af g; M!9 8 8 : J ; <9 K r
_ Q q M87!9 <fG 8 K < G  8 9?I KHK 8 AA+H!9 I @L; 9 : I @I @L+Q q M8 9 8  <9 8 i G < d8 9?8 J I 8 @J g< 
; M87!9 <fG 8 
K < G  8 9I 07G I 8 KfiK G < d8 9G 8 : 9 @I @L+Q
h!Q q M80G : 9 L 8 9fi@H!f!8 9fi< 0: J 9 < KI @A!I J : ; 8 K:G : 9 L 8 9@H!f!8 9fi< ; 9 : I @I @LP7!9 <fG 8 K0f!8  <9 8
!HI 8 K J 8 @J 8 Q @A!8 8 A
idI ; M; M8 op M8 H!9 I K ; I J ifi  R+
      R  K < G  8 A] \ ; I 8 K<9 8
7!9 <fG 8 KA+H!9 I @L; 9 : I @I @L+Q
]!Q q M88 : @0G 8 @L ; M0< 
; M80: J 9 < K: J !HI 9 8 AdI ; M; M8 op M8 H!9 I K ; I JfiI K; dI J 8: KEG : 9 L 8fi: KE; M8
8 : @$G 8 @L ; MP< 0: J 9 < K: J !HI 9 8 AdI ; MP; M8 RSR M8 H!9 I K ; I J Q0=? 8 @P<9 8K I L@I +J : @ ;I K; M8
A!I 
8 9 8 @J 8fiI @; M80: >I 0: G+G 8 @L ; M< ?:0: J 9 <+Q4I ; M; M8 op M8 H!9 I K ; I J0  R+
      R 
: J !HI 9 8 KE0: J 9 < K?; M!: ;?: 9 8 XU <7!8 9 : ; <9 K?G <@L+i dMI G 8; M80: >I 0: G!G 8 @L ; M< 
:fi0: J 9 <fiHK I @L
; M8 RSR M8 H!9 I K ; I JI KE<@G g _ U Q q MI KEI @A!I J : ; 8 K; M!: ;?; M80: >I 0: G+9 : A!I HKE< S; M8 op M8 H!9 I K ; I J
I K0HJ MG : 9 L 8 9fi; M!: @; M!: ;< ; M8 RSR M8 H!9 I K ; I J Q
: 9 L 8 99 : A!I HK0I 07G I 8 K<9 89 8 K <H!9 J 8 K
I @  8 K ; 8 AI @8 K J : 7I @L0 9 <G <J : G4I @I 0:!Q
q M8: f!<  8E8 >!7G : @!: ; I <@I K?<@G g07!: 9 ; I : G G gK : ; I K  : J ; <9 g i K I @J 8I ;?A!<8 K@< ;4; 8 G G+HK?; M8    4< 
; M87!9 <fG 8 Q q <0H!@A!8 9 K ; : @A$dM g; M8 op M8 H!9 I K ; I J0M!: K:G : 9 L 89 : A!I HK i!G <<: ;; M8 < G G < dI @L
7!H  G 8 r
h _ ] X a
T Y U ` _\
__ _h _] _X _a
_T _Y _U _` h\
h_ hh hX h]


fi
 !+   !  !!+! +
 !     !!    fi!      E 4  !    E 0+   Efi      !   
   
 E  !    fi  +  E!      EE     4  ! ? 0           ?      ?0    
 $    !     fi    !!       













E
    0   
  
  
     !+E
 
  
  
        !  
  
     ?    E!
     +   
       !   !    ?
 














S 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 






























!
    0   
  
    

 
  
  
     
    E! 
  
  
  
       + !   + 
 



S 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  














4     
 	  fffi     ff    E            !      E           E
   	  fffi     
           ff   ? E         ff           0          E   fi fi  
      
         ff   !
"   fi! #  fi 0 $!   P fi     !!  E0     %     !!  0    
   ! 0+!       '&)( *
+,- .( / / 01+ 2   !    0       3  PP fi 
!          0         E  30        !   
$  0   0 !  
  4    P E0   0  !   5
 3  5
 67P  !   
         3 E ! 0 !  ?
0     !   8
 3  8
 +
+? 9fi    0   ! :
         0      !   ;
 3  
67?
 % 3fi     8
 !    +   0      $  !              + 3       
     3  0   !  E!!    
   $! 0   E4      34 !  0    ?  !   
 3  
    ? fi 30 !       S  
 3   fi      !    P    E 0     !     S
 670   fi ?  <S  4   > = = ???
   !            1 3    0 fi    
     E  3 ? S  3      ?      1 @?           0 0  !!    
!      ?               PE!       ;
   E0    fi   
       
3   !     0      fi !         fi!       

 A0!    fi   !!   
  +
+0    B!C C ?=1 "  fi !            3  fi fi 0      fi  D     
     30   !0 $    !    3  + $        $ fi  4   P 
 !0 !     
 !   670   + "     4       3      > 4       ?  $    
!   $ $ !      $ ?       fi 0 fi    
 E    +
+ !      0!   
!       fi ! $ 0       E      F GH    0     ! !   I
 3  E  fi 
     3     E $! 0  !  <S   J      fi        
  Kfi  ;
 !    P $ 1 %
      !      
  K3  1 ! !     
          E     S!     !   3       
     fi $       8
 "   E       3        $            



fiL M N M!O!P>Q R>M8ST>O!U>V>W N M T>U>X>Q XY[Z V>U[L!V>N R>Q XY[P>\>M5]_^]a`1bc c N M
d e!f g h i e!j
kg j!l5h m!no!d g j>ph i d ni qh ei h qr i s!m h k!h m!ntg f r eu!v v wxyi d do>nz!q n { z!d |}m!z!q k!h m!i qtg f r e
m>g qm!i s!m5d i p n d i m!e!e!l[e {o>n i j!s5z!q n { z!d |
}m!n~8tg f r ei jh m!nq n f e!j!ld i j!ni q k!g s!g i j
k!z!q n { z!d>{ e!rg n r >g r h i f z!d g rq i h z>g h i e!j
|}m!n

tg f r ek m!e yn  n r k i qz!q n { z!d>{ e!rg hd n g q hm>g d {1e {
h m!n>r e!o!d n tq |m!i d nq e d !i j!sg>r e!o!d n t_yi h m

h m!n r ntz!q ho>ngq i h z>g h i e!j5ym!n r nh m!n
r q hh i d n qg r ni j8h m!n i rh g r s n hd e!f g h i e!j;g j!l8h m!n{ e!z>r h m
h i d ni qg hl>i q h g j!f ne!j!n{ r e!tai h qh g r s n h | {h m!no!d g j>p8i qh e5i h qd n { h kh m!n j8h m!ntg f r e5i qz!q n { z!d |
}m!n~)tg f r ei j5h m!nd g q hr e y'e {1h m!nh g o!d ni qh m!nte q hn !h r n tnf g q ne {1d e yz!q n { z!d j!n q q | hi q
z!q n { z!de!j!d 5i {h m!nh i d n qg r n!d g f n l8i j8g>g r h i f z!d g re!r l>n r k>yi h mh m!nh i d n qi j5h m!n
r q h k>h m!i r l;g j!l
{ e!z>r h m5r e y!d g f n l;o>n { e!r nh m!nh i d n qi j8h m!nq n f e!j!l;r e y|e!j h r g q hh m!i qtg f r eyi h m5h m!nd e!j!s n q h

8tg f r eq m!e yjh ei h qr i s!m h |}m!i qtg f r ei qz!q n { z!d{ e!rte q h>r e!o!d n tqq i j!f nh m!n r nyi d dg d yg !q
o>ngq i h z>g h i e!j5ym!n r nh m!n
r q hh m>r n nr e yqg r ne!r l>n r n l;g j!l8h i d n8 q m!e!z!d l[o>nte  n l8h e yg r l>q
i h qs e!g d |
}ef e!j!f d z!l>n k
h m!nl>i n r n j!f no>n h yn n j5
)g j!l8~[h m>g htg p n qh m!n
[tg f r e qte!r nz!q n { z!d
i qh m!nr n q h r i f h i e!jh m>g h
;>z!h qe!jh m!ne!r l>n re {q e d !i j!sq z>o>>r e!o!d n tq |}m!i qq h r i f he!r l>n rtg p n q
h m!n5>r e!o!d n tq e d  n rs e8h m>r e!z!s!m;q i ti d g rq h g h n qr n s!g r l>d n q qe {h m!ni j!i h i g dq h g h n |5}m!n{ r n n l>e!t
s i  n jo ~5g d d e yqh m!n>r e!o!d n tq e d  n r!i f pg j e {
h m!n;  >e q q i o!d ne!r l>n r q1{ e!rh i d n!d g f n tn j h |
 z>r h m!n r te!r n k i hg d d e yqtg f r e q1h m>g hte  nh i d n qg yg { r e!th m!n i rh g r s n hd e!f g h i e!j
k!>r e !i l>n lh m>g h
e h m!n rh i d n qg r nte  n l8h e yg r l>qh m!n i rh g r s n h |>z!f m;tg f r e qg r nz!q n { z!d1e!j!d 8i j8 n r 8>g r h i f z!d g r
qhghnq|
}m!n>     !  e!r l>n rz!q n l)o [
r n lz!f n qh m!ntg !i tg dr g l>i z!qo ;tg p i j!s8i h>e q q i o!d n5h e
!d g f nh i d n qyi h m!e!z!hh m!nj!n n l[h e[ n  n j8h n t>e!r g r i d >l>i q !d g f nh e!e5tg j ;g d r n g l>  !d g f n l[h i d n q |
}m!ne h m!n rh yem!n z>r i q h i f q kn lz!f h i e!jg j!l5>!i r g d k>g d q em>g  nh m!i q>r e!>n r h  |e!j!q i l>n r k>m!e yn  n r k
g[m!n z>r i q h i f;q i ti d g rh e)
'ym!n r n8h m!n8h i d n q5g r n;!d g f n l'i je!r l>n r{ r e!th i d n[;h e[h i d n [g { h n r
ym!i f m;h i d n8i q!d g f n l|>z!f m;g5!d g f n tn j he!r l>n ri j!f r n g q n qh m!ntg !i tg dr g l>i z!qq i s!j!i f g j h d  |
 j!n f h i e!j5ynl>i q f z!q qh m!nl>i n r n j!f n qo>n h yn n jh m!nh yem!n z>r i q h i f qym!n j5z!q n l{ e!rh m!n;
>z!  d nl>e!tg i j
|
1 !  
  
 ' 
>5; 
>n r g h e!rg >!d i f g h i e!j!q q n f e!j!l>q
r e!o!d n tq
;n g j
!h l| ;n g j ! h l| ;n g j !h l|
 e!tg i j
   >z!  d n
  >k ! 
       !  !>|       
 >| 
 
   g j>j!i o>g d q
> >k   
    
 | 
 
 >|     
   !h e!j!n q
  k   
   
> | 
 
 >| 
 
  g j!e i
  >k  >
    
 > | 
 
 >| 
 
r i l
 k   >k   
      
 > | 
     >|     
1} g o!d 
n  >                                1      >    !            
                      
 nm>g  ng >!d i n l[) 
    1 [h eh m!ne h m!n rl>e!tg i j!qq >n f i n l8i j5!n f h i e!j5|  |1}1g o!d n q
[
 >k1 5g j!l q m!e yh m!ntn g j;r n q z!d h q{ e!r  d n g r j!i j!s8q n q q i e!j!q |) 
    1 yg qg o!d n
h e8r n g f m8>z!i n q f n j!f ni j[g d dh m!nl>e!tg i j!q |}m!n5   q h e!j!n qg j!l   f g j>j!i o>g d ql>e!tg i j!qg r n n r 
q i t!d n |j!n;e!rh ye[tg f r e qyn r n5q z f i n j hh e)r n g f m>z!i n q f n j!f n |e h n8h m>g hyn;z!q n lh m!n


fi >     	ff
fi>> 

'() * 
. / 0 1 2 2  
3 > 0 ?  *   @
3 > 0 @   @
4 0 E   *
G  *,

    
   
+ ,3 4- 5 .
6 78 9
. -3 ;
6 7A 9
3 -. >
6 7= 6
3 3 - /F
6 78 C
3 F -4 >
A 7C =

  
  
: -;
. -B
. ->
F -.
: -;

"!# $  %

+ ,:
6 7< =
5
6 7C D
>
6 76 6
/
6 7< D
.
6 7H <

 &"!#  $  %
    +  ,3 : -> >
6 76
5- B :
6 7<
. -> >
6 76
3 ;- > >
6 76
3 ;- 5 ;
C 7D

I  ff3 5JLK M N M O P M O Q S
P R TIM U VXWN Q Y R(P V M PLZ V [ V Y N M V \ffO [)] N Y O R ^ P_\ R WN O [ P `_aN Q Uff[ ^ W(bV YcY V d Y V P V [ M PXM U V
WeV N [eR ] V YSf g gXP V M P `

'() * 
. / 0 1 2 2  
3 > 0 ?  *   @
3 > 0 @   @
4 0 E   *
G  *,

h_ i  (   
   
F 3 3 k4 / 4 C A
4 F
. > ;
3 >k B B 5
C
3 k4 . B

* $
+ ,= lH 6 8 76
= 6 7D
H = 7H
= lm < A 7A
CACA

jLi   S    * $
   
+  ,3 4 / >- >
D 8 7D
53 - ;
6 7=
3 . ;- ;
H 7C
3 4 ;- >
9 7=
5 ; B- >
A D 76

I  ff3 / JSncU VcdV Y T R Y WN [ Q I
V R T  fio p   
fi qsr O [XR dV Y N M R YIN d d t O Q N M O R [ P ubV T R Y VSN [ \(N T M V Yt V N Y [ O [ Z
O [e] N Y O R ^ PI\ R WN O [ P `

@  ev*  @ ?   ?  1        k4 > 1    @ ki L  I %e,) * @ -SjLi   L@   w* $"  ? % 1    "k
xzy {#|}~ (y   I| *  ?    @  @X  3 > >e %X  $  %" iI %(  ,@  v  ? e@  ,"i _$      * $)
   * * $ 1    "-_L%   i   kxzy {#|}~ (y   I|  @ 1  ,@e3 . 4k > > >L 1     c 11  * ?   * @c @ S 
)  X@  X % _ %  (* @L  %* $ff  e    #-_ ff %X@ *  1  e,) * @ k %* @X   @_ ) @ 
 ic %e  @  ?  @X@  ,  sxzy {#|}~ (y   I| S X* @(*      @  * $" ) s X %) ?   @X     , * s %$ * ,s,) * #-X  @ L i_ %)) ?   @
% w ffff@    ?   ) iX      X   SSLkX%  "@   ,@(i X@  %#kIi XS @  kIi e  %#k
 , ,  ) v _* z  -s+ ? %z) ?   @e  ff@  ,z  )  ),   @  ,zL   @
 % L  ? ff %e@    ? %#xzy {#|}~ (y   I| sL @S  X e*  1   w L % 1   i  )  ? L i 1    	@   w* $* )  ? %) i %
,) * @ -cL%X @ _    L*  1   w    c* @_* ) % . / 0 1 2 2  X,) * X%  L % 1   i  )  ? 
 i   _    * $"* @ / ; .  *  @X    L % ff % 1   i  )  ? e i  e    * $Iffc _ c __ #X)_ 
+,) * @ ?  )@ ?    ,z 1 X, X    ,  @  * $  ?     *  1        k@  ? %  % ( %
@  " 1      @)  s 11  * ?    *  %"@ ?    ,,) *  1   % 1 @ff @ * $z % 1       e* 
 % * S, #*  *  -S_ &  1   kS ?  ff, #(i  *  " iI,) * @ ?     ,s %es 1 2 2   k
X%  (  ? %", # @(,*      1 2 2  e,) * #-_% "5SX$  L % : 0 1 2 2  ,) * #k
 

fi    sff       "	)I   

X "SX  S
        e)  #   IX  X)  L ff  S    " ( X  
      ##( c #  #  L
    

  	ff
 fi 
        ff!"# 
$ z s  % )     Sff  S   ff
 fi 
       '&      (ff         % 
 )&   S ) e      e ) +*      ()    $ S S    & (   ff
 fi 
    
  ff
(       ff   % (     -,          ff    )&    .0/ ( % X %     e     
 "           ff1 2+3)4
 fi'ff
 fi 
       L   ff
 fi 
      "     & 
)   0L
5 )      ff2+
 3)fi4
  fi'ff
   
 fi     
    "    e +&    ff      z"S    &   %  
      X    #61
   _ ff    ) ( L  X)  
      c ff      %   L c  7L
5 +&    L     _ ) X      L    )  ) 
 ))        (     e #
8    #0L5 ff         ( ff      X s  e     
%   )       ff
 fi 
   ff
 fi 9/  
     ff 
 fi 
         ;:  =<        >  
      S X         
 X        #?L
5         LX s
 )    X  e  ?L
5        X  X) 0c@   BA 
    =1 2+3)4
 fi'ff
 fi 
     : CS    D(  # $      Ec       F_   >
G     +HJI K
L )  McE       9H $      cE        _F   
N 
G      _C    BH G     
G     +H ff
 fi 
     : SC     (D   M>
OMSC     L (D e s"  "  L L )  McE       _ "   L #8    
P 
Q     G)  M cE   _C      (  9H G    )   McE       6
R     G     
 

@c  ;AS7T U M_V   sff  WS    X0Y Z [ \ ] ^ _ T `
5LS  ;&  ff  Sff  
 fi     
   _  (  a  ) S       ( #       e      )&  
 S         (ff    
       e )      S ff    <    
      ) ) )  
a  )&    IX  01 2+3)4
 fi'ff
 fi 
        "        
)  s       

bdc9efMg  "#h  ffi! h j 1 2+3)4
 fi'ff
 fi 
     'h j -, lk;mn n  
!"# 
/s % ff a        L  z #1 2+3)4
 fi'ff
 fi 
             "o, 
    )  ff  z s &  % "    8     5Ls      )      S  "     
   pBz
,  p      
5  &   (  L_ X ))   S p (p      )$        ff
 fi 
          "  _ 
I
  X)    9& ff   %  qB,0)
q  ";", ff      L      "     s(S S)    SX  
   %  ff+)
,      # "     !<       eX  (   %  !r+,=r  )&   LL  S     
  e )     L
s   c  Ie %     _     7A  t   _     e )&   _      _  
uvw


fixy zM{| } ~ M| y z!MM{)My )
7)  	=M   M M    )9 M)      )) 9?   ))M ? ))  ;
#  
)  #   )  #   ) 
   ) M
                

!M M M  
   )M;M  #   )    ! )  
#  
)  #   )  #   ) 
   
           

+M   # 
M    )9 M)      )) 9?   ))M )  )  )0 )  
#  
)  #   )  #   ) 
   M
               

 )   M67   B6  =) ?)    7   B    6;    697    7 B 6      9  )    +9   7      6        B  ;  9           +  ;  9    7     
     +      6!;;       +   +   7  7  9   9   7 )  ?  + =7? 9   9 )    9     ;      B9   ?! My )  M6M  6)y  }  }  M =  )7  9  
       ;   9  9       +        
  )9    ) )=  ;; )M    )? M)      )) ?6  +)  B ) 7 )7     )BM)     )  ?+  ))))
+) 'ff                   ) )M ))  ;0)      0 )=M   9  
       ; +  M ))  ;;     ' ffff        )    M	    !M)=  ff 
 )!    
    ) )!9?	  ;+ 9  ;      ; 6 ))    M = )9  ;+ M  ? )7    ) ); )    M	     
9) ; ; # )M     )ff M  )!;  )) 9   ) )#M ))  ;;  )      )#    ? 9M fi! )  
 )M  ff        ) )   )M    +) 'ff      	9 B ) !     M   
 )0=    ;+)  #   ) )  ff M	      
6 ))=  ) )  ;#     ) )ff )  +; ) = 	
M)=  9  ;  6 6 )=)  )   
   ))   ?9 6M   ) ; !9  =))+  )=   B    6  )       =        )+))
 M 9     )       6  )     ;         )M)     )BM ))  ; )     ))7    ?M
    !   )!     ! )  BM ))  ;9)  )= )=   ;   79)  )M)dM ))  ;96  +   
      
M 6 ! )BM  ) ))9     )ff 
 =     )M)dM  ;)    ))  7 )M    ) 9? )B;  
)M;M  6)M    )+ M)      ))= B= M)   )# 6 )=M	        !ff      	     
 )+)  B   6  9 0;    )M ) B  ;   9 )	  + 9 7 )BM  )    )  fi!      0    
    o     ) =M ))   BM   )M  # )    M # 0M  ) )! M 6 )B  9 ?=    
    ) =    ff  7 ); M ?ff        B    9       ) M ))    !   9  
    )M ) + ))    +     9)+M )  ?    ; = )+ MM )M 69) 6M )  6 MMM)   ! 
)M6 =)          )?ff      ')   9   )    ; )    M;M )  M B M ))))))
 )+)  0     )ffMM   '9)0M )  ; )=0 M   =      
?M)=  'M#  M    ' )
 )!  ) B=   0   ; B6   #"
        ) + M ;M ) 9 ) 9B M =ff        
    ;  !     ) =M ))   # !   6    9  )))9    ) ) $9 6    
M ) ))    9 0 ) 
MMM 6  ; + +M )) )      0) )    % +M=) 6     M 9ff      9    9 )
M   )  )      )7    ) )  + BM    ) = M Bff      ff9  ?    M)     )  )
M)     ) )& 
M ) )#;    #        ?=     9)=M )M )    # 6 ) # 0     
) 6    

M ; )  ) B9   ! )     B 0 )   B 7 )M)     ) =M   ;    
'9  6 M ?M  = )9 =)        )  6 )= )6 ) = M )  ) 	 M 7 )+= ) =   M )
   ffM	    #M ))   
6  )  M   ; + )M	    0    
?9  '   M  = 0 )0) M      
? 
()

fi* + , +	-	.0/ 10+#2430-	50607 , + 305080/ 8&9;: 605;*	60, 10/ 8&9;.0<0+=?>@=BA%C&D D , +

160000

2.5e+06

140000

E

Number of Operator Applications

Number of Operator Applications

2e+06
120000

100000

E

80000

60000

1.5e+06

1e+06

40000
500000
20000

0

0
2

4

6

8

10
12
Puzzle size

14

16

18

20

0

5

10

15

20

FG H

F I0H

25
Puzzle size

30

35

40

45

50

JK L	M0N OP0QRffS T U V W XU Y S4Z\[ ] ^ _ T` S [ ^ W S a;b c A0305030d+ .050/ -#24/ -	50607 ef/ , , 305 g _ Wh` [ ^ X S@i j k k ` S T lmRY S
X ^ [ i Y T%T Y _ noZS [ WW j Zb	S ^%_ p&_ i	S ^ [ U _ ^[ i i ` V ] [ U V _ W T[ T[fp j W ] U V _ W\_ p&U Y Sfi j k k ` ST V k S lRY S
S ^ ^ _ ^fb	[ ^ Tq[ ^ Sq_ W SqT U [ W a	[ ^ aa S r V [ U V _ W4[ n[ c\_ W4S V U Y S ^fT V a S_ p%U Y SZS [ W&ls [ tf
u S T j ` U Tp _ ^
T V k S Tj iU _v w ls b	tuS T j ` U Tj i\U _T V k Sqx w l
I0y M0z	{0O { I |4} ~0 K  I0y M0z	{0O 	{  N G {0K M	0N y 0O N  | K  G z	O  O   G N |  y z	{0K  K y z\ y 
N o ff&    % 
 y   G  OM0@K   G  0M	K N O { G  N y  y N{ y  G K z	K  4G G N L O N G N G \
 O  O N   G z I OqO G  K  |  	y qz
 0G f  O\q  O M0N K   K \{ y O qz y  0G  O M	 #G 0N y 0O N  | 
450000

10

Upper bound ratio [solution length / shortest length]

400000

350000

300000
Solution length





250000

200000

150000

100000

8

6

4

2

50000

0

0
0

5

10

15

20

25
Puzzle size

30

35

40

45

50

0

FG H

5

10

15

20

25
Puzzle size

30

35

40

45

50

F I0H

JK L	M0N O }  Qs [ t%RY ST _ ` j U V _ W` S W X U Ys V W\b	[ T V ]fZ_ r S T t%[ T[p j W ] U V _ W_ pU Y Sfi j k k ` ST V k S lfs b	t%RY S^ [ U V _
b	S U n%S S WU Y ST _ ` j U V _ W@` S W X U Y4[ W a4U Y SqY S j ^ V T U V ]` _ n%S ^  b	_ j W a@_ W@U Y ST Y _ ^ U S T UT _ ` j U V _ W4[ T
[p j W ] U V _ W\_ pU Y Sfi j k k ` ST V k S l% W\b	_ U Y\X ^ [ i Y TU Y SS ^ ^ _ ^b	[ ^ T[ ^ S_ W SfT U [ W a	[ ^ a@a S r V [ U V _ W
[ n[ c_ W\S V U Y S ^T V a S_ pffU Y SfZS [ W&l
JK L	M0N O } &F G H  	y   O\O G z; y  M	 K y z  O z	L  oG  G  M0z	  K y z y   O0M	   O K  O
} & F I0H  	y   O4M000O N I0y M0z	{ y z;  ON G  K y#y   O4 y  M	 K y z  O z	L    y   O y 	 K  G 
 O z	L  \G  G  M0z	  K y z y &  Of0M	   Of K  O F   O y  M	 K y z  O z	L   {0K  K {0O { I |   O M0 y    G
{0K   G z	 O  H  K K z  O N O   K z	L4 y z y  O 0G   OL	N G   K  G   O z	O { G  G\ G  M	O y  fG
 G N \M	 hF } P ~ 0&} P P  H   O   GF 0M	K  O y @  K  G  O { Hq0G z	{	  N G   O { G 00N y  K  G  K y z G
vx 

 
J K L	M0N O
 y  M	 K y z
z 0G   G z 
 z	O N G z	{
L y N K  

fi 0&   0  ;?400&	0 &	

 	4 	;#0	     m 	        #0 0  	 m   oo 		    4    	@ @ o  	
 00  	 @   	ffff		  	4 f 	0 @ 0	  0	  \0    	  0 qo ff&    % o 		 #0  
 	0	\ 	 @ \   	   0       	f 		        	% o ff&    % #   \ 0f    
 h00	\ \ @\   0  o     0  \ o  &  B0 		  \ q	  #  	 \ 	oo  \	 ff 
 		     @#f	       @000 @0	0	h o 	 00 	0 fff40   @ 0  	4  	  o  	
   	  		q 	0	h ho ff&    % ; 	h0	   40 		  \q  #   #@ 		    
   q	   q 0	         f	  q 0   	 q 	o  \	 ff   

 	 
fffi 	 fi	   %&ff o ff&    %  	 fi ! "# "$# 
%& 
ff"	 fi!'
;       %& ff o ff&    %     	 h0   \       0	@  	     	)(f
*  0	 0   	)f(  	+  		 @0	@  	   %& ff  o ff&    %      	 m   	#@    

  4 	\ 	 @ %   	 % 	\0   \    ,  	   f 0   	 \ #	  	0 		  \q  
 

h0   \     # 0  o0	@  	 oo ff&    %  @0   	 @ 	  	0    @0    o 
0  40	@  	 	#0 		      	 	0 	   0 h  			 	 	0     	4 	  %\ 	 @0
	 f q 	  0	@    \      0     0  0  	f0 \	  00  o ff&    % 
  ff	 	@	   @      	 	  q0	@  	 	  	  4  	q@     			 4	     
 	@	0\0    	   	    	  o ff&    %  			 	     #0	     	 4 h 	  @0 
@  	 ;f   0 0    h  ff	h 0  %&
ff  o ff&    %   	    #0	     	 
    \   	 	 0 		  \4  ;	 ;  	 ; 0  #	          	 4   	\ @  	  m  	
0	@     	0 0 	0 	    	 	  0 		  \f  	    	 %	q0 	0 	    4 0  	        	  
04\   #  	B       q 	    	;      	0	B  0	 	 4 \       #  @ 	0  
q	 hf\ 	      ; 	@  	  h f 	\  0	 	  @	  h 	  	     	#    	 	h0 		  \\ 	
 	      h 	0	     	 40   \    0    	 	 	   		 ff0	o ff&    % o        	 
0	     	 @    f   	 	0 		  \   @  	   #0  4     0 	@    f    	 #f  	 
  4     	f   	 	0 		  \q  @0   \   f 0 f q     f 0 4 	   	 q 	 	0     
&0  	\    	 	&	q    f0   	 \ 4  @0 		  \f    	  &	%   	 	@0	@    
     	   f q 	  0fq 			 # 	  	;o ff&    % o 	 	0      	  0 	    
 q  	     	o   0    h@     o;     	#0 		    %&
ff  o ff&    % 
0	    	40  @  0    	f  4\	0  4 	0 		  ?  	    	 o ff&    % ; \	    
0	  0	 	  f  \  	  	f 0   q0   4	\ 	0	@  @0   \     q    0       	f  
	 0	@     0   &40 		     	    	  f	   	    	 q 00   \     0@@     # 
% 	  \ 0ff @ 	; 0

0/

7

-( .

1

2/

23 54

 
3 ,

6

8

( .

8 3

/

4

 

9

:0    	 0	      		 *;-<    		0 ; 		  \
> 
h
	+   >h   +	  >h   +	 
= 	@  
(f * 0	 0   , 0,    4 ,
? @ A B   0 4 C  D E    E D ?
(f +	 		 
 3 03  4  
   ,
B A , G
(f .q 	  0 	C  03   4 8 ? G E  I G E@ F  3 60   J A H DD G , 3  F  DD HA
% 	 4 8KL M N2NO P Q0R ST U V0W V O P X Y X Z2P V [ R M P \ V [\ R X [ M N2V ]Y X^ O P Y R M [-] R NO Y X [ _a`!O \ UX M N0bV PaP V c P V d
[ V X T [-T U VaN2V O X2R ^ V Pe f fW V O P X Y X Z[ V [ [ Y R X [ _
ghg

fii j k jlmn ojpqlrst k j qrun uvxw srxisk on uvxmyj{z}|5z~  k j
!   !  ff  {    x    
05  
ff    ! ff    ! ff    !
a                     
a   
                 
a                       
   2      2      a a             0            5      -      -!    0            
-   0         a     
05  
ff    ! ff    !
a             

a   
            
a                         
    a        a  pn lrst an k k qr        5            2            
0   {                          5      a  ) a      
5               2 5  5     x5           !  
        5               ! x     x5     {     ff  
 ! 0    -  x5    0  0a        ff   2  !5  ff 55    0 2
     ! 0    a 2    5            0       5  55    
 {   5  5     a 0      -         5      2            
   2       2        a}5   5   2!!!!       
       ff   2 a    2    2 ff          ff      x ff ff 5  
  { -     
5x  -   !
0    5  0  5        ! 0    )             ff ff     2  5 
    {5    a       5             5      5ff      {    
     5a   0  !   5      a      a 5  0 ! 0    
 5   a5          {                    {a       
ff  2       5                   x {   x      
          0     55      2           2  ff     
                 !   ) 5        	 
    0       -      
   !     ff      fi  !      ! 0    -   x!   -      
    {     {    5        2x           0  
    a    a   2     {  x          ff  5      {  
     5    {           )5            {      5 ff   
     )      )      ! 0        5            
5           x     a   {      x{    2      {     0 


fi  ! "  $#&%(')*,+ "-,.
/0 1 1 2 3,4 576 0(2 87/,4 2 9 2 6 4 :$5 ; < 0,= 9 5>1 ?3,@ 0,A 4 2 ;,@B3 :C?,1 2 ;,@BA ;CA //= 0,/= 2 A 6 5>5 D A 4 ?A 6 2 0,;B< ?;,9 6 2 0,;EGF0,=
5 H A 87/,4 5 I6 J,5(KKLJ,5 ?= 2 1 6 2 9B?,1 5 M$< 0,=G6 J,5N
OCNP/?,Q Q 4 5M0,87A 2 ;$5 ;,9 0,M5 17A1 ?3,@ 0,A 4 R 0,= 2 5 ; 6 5 M
1 6 = A 6 5 @ :S< 0,=1 0 4 D,2 ;,@(/?,Q Q 4 5>/= 0,3,4 5 8>1 ETU0 Vff5 D 5 = I 6 J,5GA 4 @ 0,= 2 6 J8&Vff0,= W 15 D 5 ;72 ;(M0,87A 2 ;,1UVXJ,5 = 5
1 ?,9 JB;A 6 ?= A 41 ?3,@ 0,A 4 2 ;,@(2 1G;,0 6U5 D,2 M5 ; 6 EffF0,=ff5 HA 87/,4 5 I2 ;6 J,5S@,= 2 MM0,87A 2 ;I6 J,5G4 0,9 A 48>2 ;,2 87A
A = 5S4 0,9 A 6 5 MC35 J,2 ;,M$0,3,1 6 A 9 4 5 1 YL6 J,5>1 5 A = 9 JB/= 0,9 5 M?= 5>9 A ;;,0 6X8>0 D 5G< 0,= VUA = MA ;,MCA 4 40 6 J,5 =UM2 R
= 5 9 6 2 0,;,1ff2 ;,9 = 5 A 1 5X6 J,5XZ$A ;JA 6 6 A ;SM2 1 6 A ;,9 5U< = 0,8[6 J,5U@ 0,A 44 0,9 A 6 2 0,;Eff\^] _K`a bG] c c dK e$A 9 f?,2 = 5 1
87A 9 = 0 1ff6 JA 6XA 4 4 0 VgA>M5 6 0,?=UA = 0,?;,MB6 J,5G0,3,1 6 A 9 4 5 1 Eh?,9 J4 0,9 A 48>2 ;,2 87A(9 A ;;,0 6X35S9 A 4 4 5 MB1 ?3 R
@ 0,A 4 1ff1 2 ;,9 5GVff5XVff0,?,4 M/= 5 < 5 =6 07A D 0 2 M76 J,5 8ETU0 Vff5 D 5 = I 0,;,9 5X6 J,5X1 5 A = 9 J(/= 0 @,= A 8[2 1U6 = A //5 M(2 ;
6 J,0 1 5S8>2 ;,2 87AI2 6U9 A ;?,1 5S6 J,5S87A 9 = 0 1U6 0>5 1 9 A /5G< = 0,86 J,5 8E
i J,2 4 5G\^] _K`a bG] c c dK eBA ;,M(\$d_jk,dKlBA = 51 2 8>2 4 A =2 ;>6 J,5 2 =?,1 5ff0 <6 J,5UJ,5 ?= 2 1 6 2 9ff< ?;,9 6 2 0,;
A 1>AB@,?,2 M5(6 0C6 J,5(87A 9 = 0B4 5 A = ;,5 = I6 J,5 :^A = 57M2 m5 = 5 ; 6>2 ;^1 5 D 5 = A 40 6 J,5 =SA 1 /5 9 6 1 E$\$d_jk,dKl
?,1 5 1B35 1 6 R n= 1 6B1 5 A = 9 JoA 1(2 6 1B6 = A 2 ;,2 ;,@LA ;,M6 5 1 6 2 ;,@L/= 0,3,4 5 8P1 0 4 D 5 = E\^] _K`a bG] c c dK e?,1 5 1
J,2 4 4 R 9 4 2 8>3,2 ;,@op VU2 6 JCA ;B5 1 9 A /5(/= 0,9 5 M?= 5 q E>rUJ,2 1SM2 m5 = 5 ;,9 572 1G1 2 @,;,2 n9 A ; 6S1 2 ;,9 5(6 J,5>2 ;,9 = 5 A 1 5 M
3= A ;,9 J,2 ;,@$< A 9 6 0,=S= 5 1 ?,4 6 2 ;,@$< = 0,8s6 J,5B87A 9 = 0 1>2 175 H,6 = 5 8>5 4 :LJA = 8S< ?,4ff2 ;	35 1 6 R n= 1 671 5 A = 9 J	3?,6
A MM170,;,4 :	6 0C6 J,59 0,;,1 6 A ; 672 ;LJ,2 4 4 R 9 4 2 8>3,2 ;,@L1 5 A = 9 Jp /= 0 D,2 M5 M	6 JA 676 J,5BJ,2 4 4 R 9 4 2 8>3,2 ;,@L1 5 A = 9 J
M0,5 1G;,0 6Un;,MC1 0 4 ?,6 2 0,;,1G6 JA 6XA = 5S1 2 @,;,2 n9 A ; 6 4 :C4 0,;,@ 5 =U6 JA ;6 J,0 1 5G< 0,?;,M$3 :B35 1 6 R n= 1 6X1 5 A = 9 Jq E
t 5 4 A 6 5 M(6 0G6 J,2 1M2 m5 = 5 ;,9 5X2 16 J,5UM2 m5 = 5 ; 6A //= 0,A 9 J,5 16 JA 6ff\$d_jk,dKlBA ;,M\^] _K`a bG] c c dK e
6 A W 576 0 VUA = MC@ 5 ;,5 = A 4 2 Q A 6 2 0,;^0 <G87A 9 = 0 1 EB\$d_jk,dKlI?,1 2 ;,@$35 1 6 R n= 1 6>1 5 A = 9 JI9 A ;;,0 67A m0,= M
6 = :,2 ;,@B5 D 5 = :C87A 9 = 02 ;C5 D 5 = :C1 6 A 6 5 E>rUJ,5 = 5 < 0,= 5 I2 6>?,1 5 1SM0,87A 2 ; R 1 /5 9 2 n9B/A 6 6 5 = ;B4 A ;,@,?A @ 576 0
1 /5 9 2 < :$< 0,=G5 A 9 J^87A 9 = 0B6 J,571 6 A 6 5 1>A 6SVXJ,2 9 J^2 6>1 J,0,?,4 M	35BA //,4 2 5 ME^\^] _K`a bG] c c dK eI?,1 2 ;,@
J,2 4 4 R 9 4 2 8>3,2 ;,@I9 A ;7A m0,= M78>0,= 5U4 2 35 = A 4A ;,M7M0,87A 2 ; R 2 ;,M5 /5 ;,M5 ; 6X@ 5 ;,5 = A 4 2 Q A 6 2 0,;(?,1 2 ;,@(AS87A 9 = 0
VXJ,5 = 5 D 5 =U2 6G2 1X4 5 @,A 4 EXuG;,0 6 J,5 =UM2 m5 = 5 ;,9 5(35 6 Vff5 5 ;6 J,5>6 Vff0(A 4 @ 0,= 2 6 J8>1X2 1X6 J,57A 6 6 5 ; 6 2 0,;(n4 6 5 = 1
6 JA 6ff6 J,5 :(?,1 5 Eff\$d_jk,dKl$?,1 5 1ff6 J,5S8>2 ;,2 8>?8SR 6 0 R 8>2 ;,2 8>?8v8>5 6 J,0,MVXJ,2 4 57\^] _K`a bG] c c dK e
?,1 5 1ff6 J,5G8>2 ;,2 8>?8SR 6 0 R 35 6 6 5 =ff8>5 6 J,0,MErUJ,5G8>2 ;,2 8>?8SR 6 0 R 8>2 ;,2 8>?8v8>5 6 J,0,MJA 16 J,5XVff5 A W,;,5 1 1
0 <A 9 f?,2 = 2 ;,@S4 0,;,@ 5 =87A 9 = 0 1 I A 14 0,9 A 48>2 ;,2 87A>35 9 0,8>5U1 9 A = 9 5UA ;,M>< A =A /A = 6M?= 2 ;,@S6 J,5U4 5 A = ;,2 ;,@
/= 0,9 5 1 1 Eff\$d_jk,dKl^;,5 5 M5 MCA>1 /5 9 2 A 4n4 6 5 =ff< 0,=ffA D 0 2 M2 ;,@(6 J,5SA 9 f?,2 1 2 6 2 0,;B0 <4 0,;,@(87A 9 = 0 1 E
\^] _K`a bG] c c dK eC2 1XAG9 0,87/,4 5 6 5 4 :BA ?,6 0,;,0,8>0,?,1ffA 4 @ 0,= 2 6 J8SYL2 6U@ 5 ;,5 = A 6 5 12 6 1U0 VX;>5 HA 87/,4 5 1
A ;,M$?,1 5 1S6 J,5>9 0,;,9 5 /,6S0 <Gw x,y z { | z }| zU6 0M5 9 2 M5(VXJ,5 ;C6 0(2 ;,9 = 5 A 1 576 J,57M0,87A 2 ;C/A = A 8>5 6 5 =GA ;,M
VXJ,5 ;^6 0$1 6 0,/$4 5 A = ;,2 ;,@Eo\$d_jk,dKl?,1 5 MoAC8>0,= 51 ?/5 = D,2 1 5 MoA //= 0,A 9 JIff/= 0,9 5 1 1 2 ;,@^JA ;,M,R
9 = A < 6 5 M76 = A 2 ;,2 ;,@75 HA 87/,4 5 1 Er0>4 5 A = ;76 0S1 0 4 D 5X1 4 2 M2 ;,@ R 6 2 4 57/?,Q Q 4 5 1 I\$d_jk,dKlBVUA 1@ 2 D 5 ;>n= 1 6
A1 2 ;,@ 4 5B/= 0,3,4 5 8s0 <XAC~ R 6 2 4 5/?,Q Q 4 5 I6 J,5 ;^A1 2 ;,@ 4 52 ;,1 6 A ;,9 5(0 <XA ;^ R /?,Q Q 4 5BA ;,M^A^  R /?,Q Q 4 5
p A < 6 5 =GVXJ,2 9 J^2 6>VUA 1>A 3,4 56 0B1 0 4 D 5AB1 2 ;,@ 4 52 ;,1 6 A ;,9 50 <GAB  R /?,Q Q 4 5 q E^\^] _K`a bG] c c dK eVUA 1
M5 8>0,;,1 6 = A 6 5 ML1 0 4 D,2 ;,@	4 A = @ 5C1 5 6 1(0 <>= A ;,M0,8/= 0,3,4 5 8>10 <S4 A = @ 5B1 2 Q 5 E&G;,5$A MD A ; 6 A @ 5B6 JA 6
\$d_jk,dKl^JA 1U0 D 5 =U\^] _K`a bG] c c dK e^2 1X2 6 1XA 3,2 4 2 6 :B6 0(JA ;,M4 5SM0,87A 2 ;,1XVU2 6 J/A = A 8>5 6 5 = 2 Q 5 M
0,/5 = A 6 0,= 1 EC\^] _K`a bG] c c dK e6 = 2 5 17A 4 4ff6 J,5A //,4 2 9 A 3,4 5$87A 9 = 0 1S2 ;^5 D 5 = :$1 6 A 6 5 EBTXA M	/A = A 8>5 R
6 5 = 2 Q 5 M$87A 9 = 0 1X35 5 ;$?,1 5 MI\^] _K`a bG] c c dK e	Vff0,?,4 M$JA D 5SJA MC6 076 = :BA 4 46 J,5SVUA :,1U0 <ff3,2 ;,M2 ;,@
6 J,5S/A = A 8>5 6 5 = 1 I= 5 1 ?,4 6 2 ;,@2 ;BA7/0 6 5 ; 6 2 A 4 4 :4 A = @ 5S3= A ;,9 J,2 ;,@7< A 9 6 0,= ErUJ,5>/5 @ R 1 0 4 2 6 A 2 = 5>M0,87A 2 ;
9 A ;;,0 6X357JA ;,M4 5 MC5 (9 2 5 ; 6 4 :C3 :B\^] _K`a bG] c c dK e^1 2 ;,9 5>2 6XM0,5 1G;,0 6X?,1 5>A>1 87A 4 41 5 6U0 <nH,5 M
0,/5 = A 6 0,= 1 E\$d_jk,dKlC1 0 4 D 5 1X2 6X3 :?,1 2 ;,@/A = A 8>5 6 5 = 2 Q 5 MB0,/5 = A 6 0,= 1 E
 ;,4 2 W 5G1 0,8>5X1 /5 5 M?/(4 5 A = ;,5 = 1ff6 JA 6U/= 0 D,2 M5G?,1ffVU2 6 J75 2 6 J,5 =ff1 6 A 6 2 1 6 2 9 A 40,=6 J,5 0,= 5 6 2 9 A 4@,?A = R
A ; 6 5 5 1Bp ff0,J,5 ;Iff   S= A 6 9 J$G5  0,;,@IU   S= 5 2 ;,5 =>
2 W,?,1 W 2 IX   h?3= A 87A ;,2 A ;	
TX?; 6 5 = I   rA M5 /A 4 4 2ffXA 6 A = A  A ;I   ~ q I\^] _K`a bG] c c dK eoJA 1SAJ,5 ?= 2 1 6 2 9;A 6 ?= 5(A ;,M
M0,5 1>;,0 6>/= 0 D,2 M5(?,1SVU2 6 J$A ; :B@,?A = A ; 6 5 5 E7 ;,M5 5 MIVXJ,2 4 5(2 6>/5 = < 0,= 8>1SD 5 = :BVff5 4 42 ;C1 0,8>57M0 R
87A 2 ;,1 I 2 6< A 2 4 12 ;G0 6 J,5 =M0,87A 2 ;,11 ?,9 JSA 16 J,5ffffR TXA ;,0 2 Er0XJA ;,M4 5ff1 ?,9 JGM0,87A 2 ;,1 I Vff5Vff0,?,4 M>JA D 5
6 0(5 ;,M0 V&\^] _K`a bG] c c dK e	VU2 6 J6 J,5>9 A /A 3,2 4 2 6 :B0 <4 5 A = ;,2 ;,@C/A = A 8>5 6 5 = 2 Q 5 M$= 5 9 ?= 1 2 D 5787A 9 = 0 1


fi   ,, B(,    $ $,  $&7v   
  ,       &      Bff  ,,  X ff^  G    ^ X ,S  ,    ,  B  ,>   ,   
 > ,G,      G ,   ,      ,  $G  X , X( 7  7, GX,  S^  G    ^ 
 ,   >7 ( ,    7U  ^(   > ,  ^ ,,^,      $  ,7 
 U$     B    ,  S ,
 ,7   ,    UX,  >    , ,     U   ,  , ff,, 
 ,  ^  C ff$      B > ,^,      $ ,   ,  B  $,       L ,	 ,      ,
   , 7 , G ff^  G    ff
  ,   L  7   ^  7 X,    ,>  , ,  (  > ,7,     L >,  $ ,B,      
 ,   ,$ B   >   B  C ,  U> , 7  , 7  $  ,    	   , > $B,      
 ,   ,(  U XS 7  ,> ff  ,  > , 77, ,X, ( ,G  U  ,  > , 7> 
      7    ff  U  ,      Sff     ff , U   
  ,C7 , 7 >     7 S ,B ,  S> , 7^ ,,, C 7  X ,,,,	 	    v ,C  
   ,    ,L $     ,,  C ^    , C, ( ,(     ,      ,$ 
^  G     ,S7 , 7    ,X ,,, C, U ,     SU  ( ,G    
 ,U    >   ff       7 , ff   ,( ,U , ,  g 7 ,X  , ( , 	   ,X
,      >  ,S
C,   >,7   X77 , 7    ,X ff   ,     U  ,S,   
      , G     7, >, S,  $ ,X ,7XL,         ,7  7, ,   ( $,    ,$ 
   ,      X ,> ,,  ,      , ,S,     ,>7 , 7    ,X     G Uff   
G,  , ff  ,,   ^  G    (     ,    ,  G U ,,     , U   >      , 
   >       ff^  G    X, > U,     , ,,X, L^  G    
 > 7,  ^ B    > ,X, $ B ,     ( ,(,7  ^   >   X ,G    , ,C,    ,C ,
,     , C   >   G $B     ,  ^7  B^  G    , 7  7     	  , 
    , ,$   ,(,       $7     >,    ,B S B, ,$   ,(  B   ^ B(,   GU   S 
    , ,B   ,    ff ,   ,ff ,G  7, >,7  ,X , B X ,Sff U ,   S ,Cff , ,,  
^  G    ^   G>  U   X    , ,(  >>7   ,(  S  U ,  S G,  , ,, g 
    U     ,,     , X>   ,  g ,   >,, SX, S   , > ,7 U       , ,
^  G    o ,, L   $,  ^ 	 C,    ,C>, X,  7    >  (    , ^X,  
   , ,^,  > ,,  > $ ^ , ^B   ( ,  ( 7,$,  	 $, ( ,(,     , C   >    
, ,   X^  G    ^ , ,    X> ,  > , > UU  , G ,S    S>   ,  
 >,B7   ,C   ,  X X77   
,  G ,G   Uff  ,,    U  U  ,,     ffU ,,, B   > ,,    ,X    ,  ,ff  ,
   ,   >^  G    	 S ,   >  B  7,    X G > , >     B  (      C    
 ,,  > (G,>  ,, XS,7  ,   ,X ,    7  , 7G  7, X    , ,7   ,   [ 
,( S (    ff ,   ff ,   , ,S  ,   
C,   G ,,  > , U ,U        
,  ,(        >    , ,( ,ff    ,CB ,,         ffGX        ,  ff,   ,B ,
  7,   S,7     ,  , ,>    , ,C   ,   v (    > ,7
C,   7U G  ,    
gff,7>,    7 7,  >      ,( ^  G    $ ,( ,G
Cv,7  7 ff ,  , B 
 ,>,,  ,(  ,   , G ,, X ,B    G  
  >  , S ,,,G,    ,  G ,>  7,     
  ,S   ,   
   $U  ^ ,  7, C   ,       >^  G     ,   (>, $ ,  ff, C 
B,, oG,B G ,B         ,^      ,, ( ,B ,      ,L S7         , ,	 $>, 
 ,7,  ,7  ,X ,  U  , ,  ,ff$         , ,   >>  U    , ,(   , ,  ff,  
  X, > ,  U  U  ,,        > ,ff,7  >     S ,      ff,       X,  , 
 ,  X  U , (  ,,       ff 7 ,X  , ,  ,7,7    ,  7,    U    , G  ff7    
  ( , ,>, ,,ff      , 7    ,>   U  ff ,,, CS    B     ,  



fi 
	fiff   
ff  

	fi
 fi
 
! "

% 
 $

 
# $
" #
 
% 

!





& ')(+*  , 
, 
, fi, - - - ,  
,  fi, % .
/ 0 1 2 3 4 %
, % 5 (  / 0 1 2 3 4 %
, 5 (
/ 0 1 2 3 4 fi, 5 (  
1 6 7 3 4 5 ( 4 %
,  5 1 6 7 3 4 % 5 ( 4 
,  5 1 6 7 3 4   5 ( 4 fi, 5
8 1 97 2 :;4 & , & ' 5 ( #=< 2 >
/ ?@0 1 24 & 5 ( $=< 2 >
/ AB6 7 4 & 5 ( 4  ,  5

CED FG
H I   JLKBMON P Q RTS U NEV W XLY Z N[M W Y Q Y \ W M ]L^ ] N _OV W XEY Z N[`ab`+S ^ c c U N d
efBf[gfihBiBj klenmoefBfBp qBj hErtsBuovLuowOx;yEvEz {l|tz {LvL}o~ z fi
uovfi  BgbB

p g
[  [OH IE  H I  IEI 
 b IB 

I ;D F) IB
 H  OI  I H fi HLLfiL@; n ;fi )   L 
oI[ D  [I H I[ I[I 
  B
I ;D  D @G I b T 
 b I@  F H D  
+ T I << 
G   I)
b D  
[I)
b D 
 H  OI  I HoG I D  < [D   D D  D  E   GIT   
Ob  I@ I@ 
I  D fi   D )OH I@  D  I 
oI@G I) I[     [D Fb
I ;D  D )     D  
t;    T     D )b
I H OG   D  E I) I 
GI  I %
,  , - - - , <E  oB   E I)I  I OI   @ 
 I@
G   I)    IoD o    I       % D o    I  I  [; T    LCfiHE   I D I  I oI[[D  H I 
H I  I  

G   I    Ib   << H  o b  H@b  H D ;O;I  & 
I    I ; I  0 , l< TIb
I ;I
/ 0 1 2 3 4 0 , 
5  T
I[ Io D  I[    I bD bH   0    G
b    &  @I H I & D oH I 
H I  I   I  O)H  o b  H
<< b  H D ;@CfiH[I  I H     I &   D  I /) & ;oIO
I ;IO IO D  Ib    D  1 6 7 3 4 / 5 ( 4 0 , 
5
@I H I / 0 1 2 3 4 0 , 
5 ( / ;I  1  ( 4 0  ,   5   1  ( 4 0  ,   5 
I o    D  [In     fi 

I  oI I  1    1 D O
I ;I   :;4 1  , 1 5 ( 0   0  +     ;I  &(* /  , - - - , / o . 
I
    I L;I  & ')(+*    , - - - ,      , % . 
I@  I[F  
    I  L[I@G
O
 I HB  ;    [ D  I oD B I[  H F I  
8  G  
  /  (l   H)   0  8 O[IOI 

H I   D   8b  D  Ib  H D     D D )    I 
 bfi  o         D )b H  I   < 2 >
/ AB6 7 4 & 5    D @    I  I fi  o     D Tb H  I  
< 2 >
/ ?@0 1 24 & 5 BCED FG
H I     [[I 
 b I @ Ho IO 
  IT    D  o[IOI G
H D   D O G
  D D 
 IOIb
I   H D 
I nD  I
I F D 
D F [I   D   ;F I I H   D  I n  I << 
G   I  )D O
 D I  H@ OD 
  D  E 
H I I@    H  B[IToI D F  [oI H I)   I  
IOD FI GF bI   H  I
 I D   FH  
D H 
I H O[Ib I   ) D FD fi   )    H@D T IO 

    
D     I
I  oI I  I
I b  D  I  IbI ) D  I bD  ID )D O
G

I  
  IO   4 < 5 fi Ib I      H[D 
OG  D  D I    <  b  IT G
H IO 
 [D )D )
OD 
   [CfiH[ IT  OIOH I   ;fioIOOG  D   I
O  o D FD fi   @    Ho  < 
L  I  $  D    II 
  
 H  OI  I H G I  Hn ;fi )   L +D  I << 
G   I

b D ;
efBf[gfihBiBj klmoBgnTt
j gfihBqtfiEp Bj hErtbB

p gfiq|tz {LvL}o~ z fi
uovfi
[D T I   D     D O
H  o 
 T 
I  D fi I ) [b  H  ) I  H I  n ;fi )   L D 
  [;    [D  H I  
I  T  IOI G
H D   D b G
  D 
I ;I D L  I  $ ;  
 )
H  I 
    I Ho 
 [G I [ I  ITb  H  o      IT        I << 
G   IO
H  I D  4 < 5 [D  
H I   
  Ib      @[Ib
H  o  
IbI   D  F I I H   D  I   
I  D   G  D I  T 
D  D 
 H[T I [ Bb  H  [ b
I   [;    
Efinnl   n T )      E fi      T  T  L      ) 
         ofi   ;   
     & '  O       O  << ;         &)(+* /  , - - - , /   .  O);    T       @   fi


fi	 
 ff 
fi 
fi ff 
   	ff  
 "!#%$'&( ( ff 

)+*,#- . / 0- 1 - ,32 4 2 1 5
6 /. 4 . - 7'8 - 7 92
:
; 2 /2 1 - 4 2 < = *- 7
>?2 4A@ B C D D D C @ EGF H BJI 2K-K1 - /L*,M02 1 ,394 - 4 . */"* NAO C D D D C PRQ#S%O T
; 2 /2 1 - 4 2 < = *- 7U1 2 4 91 /VW @ B C D D D C @ E F H B C X Y T
ZG- V . [ < *02 1 - 4 *1 V
\ ]UC ^C _ C ` a Tb>?2 4c_ d e f g X h'i"g j k C l k h Tb^?g m hb. VcL2 n?/2 LR- V o
tu @ j _ p f g j kyxzO C l k hMo{j'izj k C liAl k
v
@ j _ p q r f s g j C lh'i uw X
o{j'izj kyxzO C liAl k
@ j _ p f g j C lh
o{d @ |p ` }cj m p
^?g m hb. V+9/L2 n?/2 LN *1~j k~izPSJO Ty]UC _ C `+- 1 2+L2 n?/2 LRV . ,3. 7 - 1 7  T
~2 91 . V 4 . [ < N 9/[ 4 . */ |'g m C m  hKiMUP Qb P Q S _ e p ^?g m C m  h 3xR'PU^?g PRp @ bd e g m h C
_ d e f g PRp @ cj _ pg m h h hxA^?g _ d e f g X h C _ d e f g PRp @ cj _ pg m h h h
'- I 7 2O oGy '        ?   '       ?  ?'  y   + G      fi G ff ff    G   "!3
     ~  3    
    m       ym d _  _ pg m C m  h 
  ^+g _ d e f g X h C _ d e f g ?p @ cj _ pg m h h hO #  z        J             d"  J  
|'g dg m h C m  hGJ|'g m C m  h 
 ? 
>?2 4_ d e f g PRp @ cj _ pg m h h iW j  C l  Y c_ d e f g X hiW j k C l k Y - /LzPRp @ bd e g m hRiW j  C l  Y T~2
N * 7 7 * ~. /= I - V . [*02 1 - 4 *1 VG~. 7 7'L2 [ 1 2 - V 24 2+8 - 7 92* Nb|Uo
utu l l k`
u l ciAl kM j Jj k^
v
j Jj k]
d+i u
g h
uu
j k^
w l l kM jj J
Jj k_
yRU G|?~3cm  m    G R  U 3  RU b           R    
  
t        b        G     G     G        G        G         
i v w          b              ~                                 
 
            
'  #  b 3#[ *,#07 2 4 2    #      ~    ~    3     #          dzR
     y|'g dg m h C m  h~J|'g m C m  h 
 ? 
Zb>?2 ,#,#-+O  G2G/2 2 L34 *c01 * 8 2y*/7 cN *1U4 2y[ - V 2 V'c2 1 2G^+g _ d e f g X h C _ d e g Pp @ cj _ pg m h h hUiO T
~2 1 2+- 1 2GN *91b0* V V . I 7 2+[ - V 2 V Ty'- I 7 2 V~ X- /LO~V * Jc. [ #*02 1 - 4 *1y[ - / I 2+- 007 . 2 L. /#2 - [ 
* N?4 2G[ - V 2 Vb4 *+L2 [ 1 2 - V 2G4 2~8 - 7 92c* NU|UTyU*,#-  2G4 2~01 ** N?V . ,#07 2 1 4 2~4 - I 7 2 Vb- V V 9,32cP{AT


fiU      " 
3 
	fiff 

  ff ff ff   	fiff !"$# %&'fi( )# * * +,& -/.,0    12.,3  4 5 6 7 ff
 8 5 6 7  6 ff9;:<9>=0 ? ? 6 ff/=@ 5 6 ff A=Bff @ C 5 @   155 @ ff D E F F 9<GH4I JBK 9
L     35 =Bff @   5 @
 = =6  3    5 B !M,Dff6 ff  1 DN5 C Dff 5 6 0  5   5 0 ff < 8O J 9 G HQP P 9 L !

R  S T
U/VXWY ZZ[ EB\] Y<^ [ _XZ` a Y4b c `ZdY [ ^ egf h [ h YNh `$[Qf h [ h Y ]ji h eX[k ` ] Y c4eY lBc i f h i ^a [ k lY m
njeY c Y b `c Y \ [ b h Y c[o_ i h Y_lBZpBY c` b,f h [ h Y f \ ] Y ]ji k k,c Y [ ^ eh eYf h [ h Yq ]ji h e ,r q s q t uwv JB\] e i ^ e
i fh eYx `[ k,f h [ h Y m 9L h i k Y f[ c Y4Z` a Y y i _ h `<h eY i cx `[ k,k `^ [ h i `_mNnjeYNZ[ z i ZlBZ{y i f h [ _^ Y` b
Y [ ^ eh i k Yb c `Z i h f/x `[ k k `^ [ h i `_ i f Er 9XH4K u mw|/[ ^ eZ` a Y ZY _ h,` bfi[h i k Yjh ` ] [ c yBf i h fwx `[ kk `^ [ h i `_
i _ a ` k a Y fZ` a i _xh eYpk [ _B}h i k Yh `pBY[ y ~ [ ^ Y _ hh `h eY_Y zhjh i k Y \ [ _y4h eY _Nlf i _xY i h eY cj[pB[ f i ^
`BY c [ h `c`c[4Z[ ^ c ``BY c [ h `cjh `4[ yBa [ _^ Yh eY_Y zhh i k Y mjhh eYpBY x i _B_ i _x<` b/h e i f`BY c [ h i `_
h eYpk [ _B}h i k Y^ [ _pBY[ _ V ] eY c Y \ f ` ] Y_Y Y y4h `[ yBa [ _^ Y i h[ hZ` f h r 92H<K u r 92H4E uwh i ZY fh `
pBc i _x i hjh `y i f h [ _^ Y K b c `Zh eY_Y zhjh i k Y m/jb h Y ch eB[ h \ b `ch eYc Y Z[ i _ i _x Er 9HgK u HgK h i ZY f \
[4Z[ ^ c `4`BY c [ h `c^ [ _<Z` a Yh eYpk [ _B}<[ ] [ Vb c `Zh eY_Y zhh i k Y \ pBlhh eYy i f h [ _^ Y ]ji k k/pBY[ h
Z` f h r h e i f i f[Bc `BY c h V4` b,h eYf BY ^ i o^  u \ f ` ] Y ]ji k k,_Y Y y<h `[ yBa [ _^ Y i h[ hjZ` f h I h i ZY f
h `<pBc i _x i h_Y zhh `Nh eY4_Y zhh i k Y m4U/VQWY ZZ[ K \ h eY4pk [ _B}<h i k Y4^ [ _pBY4pBc `lxe hh `Ny i f h [ _^ Y
K lf i _xQ`_k V$pB[ f i ^N`BY c [ h `c f m<jb h Y cpBc i _x i _xQh eY4Y Zh VQh i k Y<_Y zhh `h eYN_Y zhh i k Y \/i _$h eY
] `c f h/^ [ f Y \ h eY[ k x `c i h eBZZ[ Vh c V[ k kh eYpB[ f i ^`BY c [ h `c f[ _yN[ k kh eYZ[ ^ c ` f r ]ji h e4[h ` h [ k
k Y _x h eN` b K E upBY b `c Yo_y i _xNh eY`_Yh eB[ hc Y yl^ Y fh eYeY lBc i f h i ^a [ k lY mk k,h e i fk Y [ yBfh `h eY
b ` k k ` ]ji _x<pB`lB_yQ`_Nh eYh ` h [ k,_lBZpBY c` bpB[ f i ^`BY c [ h `c f[ Bk i Y y ] e i k Yf ` k a i _x<[4Bc `pk Y Z
lf i _xN[ _y 
9 L   r r 9HXK u r 9H$E u Ir Er 9HgK u HgK u u Er 9HgK u r K E j$u v E F F 9 G H$I JBK 9 L
njeYZ[ z i Z[ fi
k k Y _x h eN` b/[Z[ ^ c ` i f K F mwnjeY c Y b `c Y \ h eYk Y _x h eN` b/[f ` k lh i `_4b `lB_y<p V
"$# %&'fi( )# * * ,
+ & -$i fpB`lB_yBY yQp V
9 L   r r 9HgK ufi r 9>HQE ufi Ir Er 9HXK u HXK u u Er 9HXK u K F v O J 9 G HQP P 9 L
        
  
  
 
        
           
 


 Q 
k lBc
    
   
      
       
     
      
 Q 
c lk
       
 
      
   
          

    
 vg    9
c lBlk y
 
        
        
      

    
 v 9
lBlk yc yBk lBlBc y
 
           
   
    
n,[ p k Y E JBw         /   4 ,           /      j       w
      w  /j    j          w  j             
 vg 

 

     fi 


y



        
  
        
   
           
    
   
         
    
      
      
 

  
    
            
 
           
  

         
    
  
        
    
    
    /       w

fi   B B<4BBB   BBB Q BQB B QBBN>,   


 Q 
   B  fi 




 Q 




 Q 


X


  


/
 XX


, X
  fiN 

, X
  fiN 
 g 


 Q 
   B   







B  B  
B  B  
B        B 

 

 B  B  

 j2

B     B

wX
 X

B  B

wX
 

 

fi
  X

  B        B 

 Q 



fi
  j
wX>Q
fi
  j
wX>Q

 B  B      B 



 Q 


 g 

 

    B   

      
 
          
    
         
    

        
    
         
    

        
    
              

          
    
            
    

          
    
           
       

       
    
           
    

          
    
              

          
     
         
    

          
    
          
    

          
    
            
    

          
    
     
    

          
    
            
    

         
    
            
    

     
    
     

      
 
         
    
          
       

      
    
           
    

        
    
             

          
    
            
    

          
    
            
      
 
    
    
           
    

          
    
            
    

          
     
           
    

          
       
         
    

          
    
            
    

          
    
        
  
    
 
     
     

 

   

     
  
       
  

  
  
   

	
  B fffi 
          !#"  
    "$     ! %  %   
 #   % & '%  ! %   (  % )  
  &  #
  *'  +  #, & 
"  '    - "   .  ! "   '      , , & %    %  /
012

fi3(4 576/8 9 : ;78 4 5=<?>A@7B76/CD74 ;/EF
G=H'I J KLM HN OH'M J PH'Q H PPJ MN RS7T R U H'N O7J NVXW Y$Z/[(\ ]W ^ ^ _
Z `aI J K#M R Q U HJ K bM R Q U J cQ H.S7T Rc d
Q H Pfe KAgah ikj lH U H KAme N ORLNQ H J T Ke KnAM e PSQ boc baS7H T p RT Pe KnAq'r'sAM H J T I OAe KaH J I OaSQ J I H#m.OH T H
JAPJ I T Re MLM H toe KaN OH#RT e n e K7J QS7T RR p uvR mH U H T w7e KM N H J tkR pLM e Knox y ze KkN OHJ c7R U Hp RT PLQ J7w
mHme Q Q.LM HA{7| }oh x z7w(N OHAQ H Kn N O=R p.N OHAQ RKn H M NPJ I T R/w
I J KXc7HaLM H t~J MJ KXL7S7S7H Tc7RL7KtRK
N OH.t7H SN OAR p
N OH.M H J T I O7l uOe Mn e U H M.Jc7RL7KtaR px  7 { z7   7   {i j( x  7 { z7   7  y  io w
m.Oe I OAe M.J c7RLN{ 7w y7x z7w  z zN e PH MQ J T n H T'N O7J KN OHI RKM N J K Np RTVXW Y$Z/[(\ ]W ^ ^ _
Z `XJ p N H TQ H J T K d
e Kn/uGOe Q He KAN OH#S7L7T H#M H KM HR p
I RPS7LN J N e RK7J Q(I RPSQ H e N bac7R N Oac7RL7Kt7Mc7H Q RKnAN RN OHM J PH
I RPSQ H e N baI Q J M M w7N OHOLn HI RKM N J K NPJ  H MN Oe Mp J I N.PH J Ke Kn Q H M M.p RTJ K baS7T J I N e I J Q
S7L7T S7R M H u
o / /'7/
qLe w uh x    l u sR Q Ue Kn.N OHz d S7L  Q Hme N O.n H KH N e IS7T R nT J PPe Kn/u  K#.R  J7w /u uh t(u l w/ /   
     #k /~ /   k         #$       wS7S$u.x x $x 7usN J K p RT t~q'RR M N RT H w
sN J K p RT t(w7J Q e p RT Ke J7u
ROH K$wGu'Gu.h x   y l u~M e Knt7e M N T e c7LN e RK d p T H H=Q H J T Ke KnN OH RT bXN RJ K7J Q b HkM R Q LN e RKS7J N O
I J I Oe KnaPH I O7J Ke M PM u  $     / ( /       /  w7h y l w7   7  7u
N  e RKe wu w(fN  e RKe w
uh x   {l u#sN J N e M N e I J Q'PH N ORt7M.p RTJ K7J Q b e KnoM S7H H t/L7S=Q H J T Ke KnoH  d
S7H T e PH K N M uo   /#(   /   w$ 7w/   7 {7u
re  H M wu7u wv.J T N w 
uu we Q M M RK$w7#u /u$h x   y l u/$H J T Ke KnAJ KtH H I LN e Knn H KH T J Q e  H toT Rc7R N
SQ J KM u       $ /       /  w7 w/y 7x 7y z z7u
re K7 H Q M O N H e K$wu w=J T  R Ue N I O$w
s$uh x   y l uksH Q H I N e U HoJ I 7Le M e N e RK~J KtLN e Q e  J N e RKR pPJ I T R
RS7H T J N RT M Q H J T Ke KnXS7T R nT J PM R Q U H MN OHan H KH T J QfS7L  Q H u~(H I O7Ke I J Q.T H S7RT N
 s7 y7x 7w7RPS7LN H TsI e H KI HH S7J T N PH K N w7(H I O7Ke RK$w$v.J e p J7w/ M T J H Q u
 e KM c7H T n/wuu w'v.J T U H b wGuuh x   y l uX N H T J N e U Hkc7T RJ t7H Ke Kn/u       ' /       /  w
  h y d  l w7   7 z 7u
 T J N I O$w/u wH  RKn/wuh x   y l u.='s7'S7T Rc7J ce Q e M N e IXM R Q LN e RK~N RXN OH=LN e Q e N b
S7T RcQ H Pe KXM S7H H td L7SXQ H J T Ke Kn/u= K            a X$ / k    /         /   
      / /       /  w S7S$u/y   7y {7us7J Ka R M H w/J Q e p RT Ke J7u7oRT nJ KAJ L p PJ K7K$u
 T H e KH T wu wf$e LM  e w'/uh x  z  l uA KI RT S7RT J N e Kn=T H t/L7Kt/J K NQ H J T KH tT LQ H M fS7T H Q e Pe K7J T b
p RT PJ Q7J K7J Q bM e M'R p('qu$ KA            . .     /   /   /    / 7  /       / 
        / /       /  w S7S$u$ { { 7 {7u H N T R e N w7oe I Oe nJ K$u7oRT nJ KAJ L p PJ K7K$u
 c7J7w  u
u.h x  z  l uX$H J T Ke KnXc bXt7e M I R U H T e KnPJ I T R Me K~S7L  Q HoM R Q Ue Kn/u~ K            
  /   /   /    / $7  /       /          ( /       /  wS7S$u$ { 7 {y7u7$R M
Kn H Q H M w/J Q e p RT Ke J7u/oRT nJ KAJ L p PJ K7K$u
 c7J7w  uu.h x  z  l uXOH L7T e M N e IXJ S7S7T RJ I OXN R=N OHat7e M I R U H T bR p#PJ I T R d RS7H T J N RT M u~o   /
(   /   w/h {l w7y z  77x 7u
 c7J7w Gu w G=R nLQ e M w/u w(J Kn Q H b w7
u/h x  z z l u7
T J t7e Kn#R aM e PSQ e I e N baJ KtI R U H T J n He Ke KI T H PH K d
N J QI RKI H SNQ H J T Ke Kn/u( KA            . '     /   /    /         /   o   /
(   /   wS7S$u/  7 7u K7KaT c7RT w7= u7oRT nJ KAJ L p PJ K7K$u


fi   7 7kA777   777 /= 7=7 7 /=77a?
/   
 7 $$/ $   /(        k    	ff
fi              !
" # $  #   % ' &  (  )*+ */
,. -  .7$     ' /'     0# 12  3 546 7   8%7 9812    $  06!  "    : ;=<   #   % '> ?  @BA $
C'   $
,. -  ./
  (  = D2?   A  E  
A F G   E H$    A  F $I  #  J6   K #     0   2 L &   */ )7 7
,. - 6 ..     N
 M 
  E H$  O
 ?    A  ? P  E Q  
  ?  RSUT 
 ? @BA 5A Q@?   ? G =   k  A  F $
 #  J6   K #     0    &V$     )$ + 7
,. - = .  +  B
 .6 A  E  ? @a  A  F 
 -  Q77 A @? Fff
 A 7 ?  R/
 WN
 46     X   0 %8 !ff# $B55K
1 <2   0129 < %  Y Z46    0 \[=   #   ]O[= <2  X   # 7   ]5 ^ $  0  0_63    :
 # %  

$/ ` )7 a7 A  -  Q( b6T
,. - ' .( $d
 c=A    ' D2 T  a  5 e ?  Q?  Rk 
 ? @BA 
   fi ? # A   f6    E -  fi75 
fi    
WN
 46     X   0 % !ff# $ffg'  #   # $h #    ^I  !     O U #  J6    K #     0   ' 

$
 ` + ` )$ ` + 7 >
   A  Q( i  R $ jo RA O
 ,A fi - @BA 7$
, A ?  F  ? k/ j(   (   " # $  #    'l6     #   % ' M P     fnm k/
D'A ?  Q(7//  .    G  @a >
/$ 7\
  f6    T
   a  ' b fi7 k ?  RO? A  A  S c 8A  A   @# - A
R     A 2  A   ?  R@ F  A  ?  @a6 "  $ 8/'     02 o (  )*a7
jUA  k  P?  F $$ Y
 .  Q fi  F     W #  `     @BA  ? F p
  ? @   A  ? q
 f?  r
 Q QfiF  ? P 
  A   ?  RS' A  ?  HF ?  RBP  
 ? @?  ?  RA  A  F $= W ff
 46     X   0 % !8# $s8 t6  X 0B^I <2   :
#    XB1 <  X  </'     0Uuff  v % $ <$ TG  Q  $$ F    A  Q(
jUA  k  P?  F $7$ 7? F     >
 M(     = c     -=-  R    ?  R? ff
   A   ?  R/6 W 
 46     X   0 %5 !
w=$BgI ! # $K #    #    I^I  !     B U"  $ B/'     02 

$2 * )*a 7 T7
 T G7 
jUW  jo RA ff
 ,A fi - @BA 7$
jUA  k  P?  F $.$   F    
 >
6 M#  (  \
 W  -  @BA  ? q
 H    ?  RS~    F  ? x
 @ F  A  ?  @
 ?
  A   ?  RA    @ I "  $ 8/'     02 o y `  (  ( )$ 7 
j?   $'$.     =    F  ? P   q
 R     A  ?  ?  Rq
 A  -  
7  G  @    P?  R/N
 Wr
 46     X   0 %B !
# $h # $ffK #    #    2  #^I  !     8  #  J6   'K #     0    

$2  a ) 7D$ 
T R      b6T jo RA O
 ,A fi - @BA 7$
j?   $$$     5
 /'     0O12    $^I #   's8 t6  X 0 z5_I{ <2   #   : | %  XB6< <2    $
,5 fi f6   C'   $ jT
j?  F      c j  } R  ~' >
   q
 C6A     ?  .   (   D2 A   ?  RG   p
  ? @   A  ? 2 S'T5F fi?  ?  R
A  Q  H$ ?  Rn
7  G  @8E    P?  R  fi7 ?   ? F  
 Wr
 j? F  A   k ? 8 ..$ 5 bA  G7    /5  .
j?  F      c j/  Q7    "  $ 5/'     0z' #  J6   K #     0   6< <2    $ c6?  RA7
> A B
 T5  / bA  ? -   ? A7
jo   ' .    5
 c  ~' F . - fi Bfi k  Bfi ?  ?  k -6 p
 A  A  ?  E GA   QU  A   ?  R/8 W 
46     X   0 % !O# $B_6  3  # $ffK #    #    '  #5^I  !     B !8 #  J6   'K #     0   


$/ `  )7 ( +7 M    ?   j? F  ? RA $ jo RA O
 ,A fi - @BA 7$


fi'      UO 
5       2'5       ffU               U N6   6 ff     r 
  2 ''     =    22    OU   6  O   B 2
    228=       6    2   5   6   2         '6     B5  6
=         \        q            N        8    2  B2          
5    U     '6   U          
    2B Z   2N=      6   B     5     ff  BU     
  U      ff B          U q6         B ff ffI   U              O 
   6   I        U 55    I   5 625   2   I      8=      
  O   B 2
    B xZ   2N=      =O IN      B                  
   ' 
 2 B       2        '   2  
6     N=      =       2    5      B           5         6  
       5 8 '      O                   
    8'     5       
8  O   B 2
   B ' 5     B6      	
 2    U      
    8    N6         
 5 
 ff6                          O   6             2    
          2  ff   B 2
  B \5    B'       fi  I        B     	
   O     O     I'     
   ff    5    B   r n6B  O     
 5       q B          
      
    '5= B 5      Z6B        N  ff         x q6     58   I
    B' fi        8             = 5     I ' fi   2
   =  fi    2I =      I6     Bd       6  U 8        6       U 
fiI      8'     2 '   2  
   =2\I      85 
   U       O U        B    
              
         '           
 2 8    225       6  B     8           65         
  2I   6                 
  B   2B 
 5    2       =     ff       8    I     ff 
fiI n       q r6         B    U         ff     x 
    
'     2         22     '  ff   B 2
=       = 'd5       225'I      5\  B '    6 B 5          
   5       6   = 5   6            6      " !    
=      =5     Z   B       N            nB         8     n 
6          5                    '     6             2    
          O   B 2

#$#

fi% & ' &()"* +"&,.-"(/"0"1 ' & -"/"2"* 2354 0"/5%0"' +"* 235)"6"&879	7;:<= = ' &
>? @ A B"CD"E	DF G H H I J DKL A M L N	A OMA OM LP Q	L RA OM8S G TVU"WX X Y M ZD[\ ] ^ _ _ ` a b c d] eVf g_Vh] i j kl] ^ a _ f i
] em` a bn o\ c gBp q Br r s t"r r T"D

uvw

fiJournal of Artificial Intelligence Research 8 (1998) 67-91

Submitted 7/97; published 3/98

Cached Sucient Statistics for Ecient Machine Learning
with Large Datasets
Andrew Moore
Mary Soon Lee

School of Computer Science and Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA 15213

awm@cs.cmu.edu
mslee@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

This paper introduces new algorithms and data structures for quick counting for machine
learning datasets. We focus on the counting task of constructing contingency tables, but
our approach is also applicable to counting the number of records in a dataset that match
conjunctive queries. Subject to certain assumptions, the costs of these operations can be
shown to be independent of the number of records in the dataset and loglinear in the
number of non-zero entries in the contingency table.
We provide a very sparse data structure, the ADtree, to minimize memory use. We
provide analytical worst-case bounds for this structure for several models of data distribution. We empirically demonstrate that tractably-sized data structures can be produced for
large real-world datasets by (a) using a sparse tree structure that never allocates memory
for counts of zero, (b) never allocating memory for counts that can be deduced from other
counts, and (c) not bothering to expand the tree fully near its leaves.
We show how the ADtree can be used to accelerate Bayes net structure finding algorithms, rule learning algorithms, and feature selection algorithms, and we provide a
number of empirical results comparing ADtree methods against traditional direct counting
approaches. We also discuss the possible uses of ADtrees in other machine learning methods, and discuss the merits of ADtrees in comparison with alternative representations such
as kd-trees, R-trees and Frequent Sets.

1. Caching Sucient Statistics

Computational eciency is an important concern for machine learning algorithms, especially
when applied to large datasets (Fayyad, Mannila, & Piatetsky-Shapiro, 1997; Fayyad &
Uthurusamy, 1996) or in real-time scenarios. In earlier work we showed how kd-trees with
multiresolution cached regression matrix statistics can enable very fast locally weighted
and instance based regression (Moore, Schneider, & Deng, 1997). In this paper, we attempt
to accelerate predictions for symbolic attributes using a kind of kd-tree that splits on all
dimensions at all nodes.
Many machine learning algorithms operating on datasets of symbolic attributes need to
do frequent counting. This work is also applicable to Online Analytical Processing (OLAP)
applications in data mining, where operations on large datasets such as multidimensional
database access, DataCube operations (Harinarayan, Rajaraman, & Ullman, 1996), and
association rule learning (Agrawal, Mannila, Srikant, Toivonen, & Verkamo, 1996) could be
accelerated by fast counting.
Let us begin by establishing some notation. We are given a data set with R records
and M attributes. The attributes are called a1; a2; : : : aM . The value of attribute ai in the
c 1998 AI Access Foundation and Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. All rights reserved.

fiMoore & Lee

th record is a small integer lying in the range f1; 2; : : : ni g where ni is called the arity of
attribute i. Figure 1 gives an example.
k

Attributes

a1

a2

a3

n 1= 2

n 2= 4

n 3= 2

Record 1

1

1

1

M=3

Record 2

2

3

1

R=6

Record 3

2

4

2

Record 4

1

3

1

Record 5

2

3

1

Record 6

1

3

1

Arity

Figure 1: A simple dataset used as an example. It has R = 6 records and
M = 3 attributes.

1.1 Queries

A query is a set of (attribute = value) pairs in which the left hand sides of the pairs form
a subset of fa1 : : : aM g arranged in increasing order of index. Four examples of queries for
our dataset are
(a1 = 1); (a2 = 3; a3 = 1); (); (a1 = 2; a2 = 4; a3 = 2)

(1)

Notice that the total number of possible queries is M
i=1 (ni + 1). This is because each
attribute can either appear in the query with one of the ni values it may take, or it may be
omitted (which is equivalent to giving it a ai = * \don't care" value).

1.2 Counts

The count of a query, denoted by C (Query) is simply the number of records in the dataset
matching all the (attribute = value) pairs in Query. For our example dataset we find:
( 1 = 1)
C (a2 = 3; a3 = 1)
C ()
C (a1 = 2; a2 = 4; a3 = 2)
C a

1.3 Contingency Tables

=
=
=
=

3
4
6
1

Each subset of attributes, ai(1) : : : ai(n) , has an associated contingency table denoted by
ct(ai(1) : : : ai(n)). This is a table with a row for each of the possible sets of values for
ai(1) : : : ai(n) . The row corresponding to ai(1) = v1 : : : ai(n) = vn records the count C (ai(1) =
3
v1 : : : ai(n) = vn ). Our example dataset has 3 attributes and so 2 = 8 contingency tables
exist, depicted in Figure 2.
68

fiCached Sufficient Statistics for Efficient Machine Learning

ct()

ct(a1 )

ct(a3 )

#

a #

a #

a a a #
1

2

3

6

1 3
2 3

1 5
2 1

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4

1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2

1

ct(a2 )

ct(a1,a2,a3 )

3

a #
2

1
2
3
4

1
0
4
1

ct(a1,a2 )

ct(a1, a3 )
a a #
1

3

1
1
2
2

1
2
1
2

3
0
2
1

ct(a2,a3 )

a a #
1

2

a a #
2

3

1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2

1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4

1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4

1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2

1
0
2
0
0
0
2
1

1
0
0
0
4
0
0
1

1
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
1

Figure 2: The eight possible contingency tables for the dataset of Figure 1.
A conditional contingency table, written
ct(ai(1) : : : ai(n) j aj(1) = u1; : : : aj(p) = up)

(2)

is the contingency table for the subset of records in the dataset that match the query to
the right of the j symbol. For example,
a1

1
ct(a1 ; a3 j a2 = 3) = 1
2
2

a3

1
2
1
2

#
2
0
2
0

Contingency tables are used in a variety of machine learning applications, including
building the probability tables for Bayes nets and evaluating candidate conjunctive rules in
rule learning algorithms (Quinlan, 1990; Clark & Niblett, 1989). It would thus be desirable
to be able to perform such counting eciently.
If we are prepared to pay a one-time cost for building a caching data structure, then it is
easy to suggest a mechanism for doing counting in constant time. For each possible query,
we precompute the contingency table. The total amount of numbers stored in memory for
such a data structure would be M
i=1 (ni + 1), which even for our humble dataset of Figure 1
is 45, as revealed by Figure 2. For a real dataset with more than ten attributes of medium
arity, or fifteen binary attributes, this is far too large to fit in main memory.
We would like to retain the speed of precomputed contingency tables without incurring
an intractable memory demand. That is the subject of this paper.

2. Cache Reduction 1: The Dense ADtree for Caching Sucient Statistics

First we will describe the ADtree, the data structure we will use to represent the set of
all possible counts. Our initial simplified description is an obvious tree representation that
does not yield any immediate memory savings,1 but will later provide several opportunities
1. The SE-tree (Rymon, 1993) is a similar data structure.

69

fiMoore & Lee

for cutting off zero counts and redundant counts. This structure is shown in Figure 3. An
ADtree node (shown as a rectangle) has child nodes called \Vary nodes" (shown as ovals).
Each ADnode represents a query and stores the number of records that match the query (in
the C = # field). The Vary aj child of an ADnode has one child for each of the nj values
of attribute aj . The kth such child represents the same query as Vary aj 's parent, with the
additional constraint that aj = k.
a =*
1

.
.
.

aM = *
c=#

Vary a 1
a =1

a =n

a =*

a =*

a =*

a =1

..
.

..
.

1
2

..
.

1

...

2

...

Vary a 2

1

a =*

1
2

1

...

a =n
2

..
.

2

aM = *

aM = *

aM = *

aM = *

c=#

c=#

c=#

c=#

...

...

...
Vary a 2

Vary a M

Vary a 3

Vary a M

..
.

..
.

...
Vary a M

Figure 3: The top ADnodes of an ADtree, described in the text.
Notes regarding this structure:

 Although drawn on the diagram, the description of the query (e.g.,

= 1; a2 =
*; ::aM = * on the leftmost ADnode of the second level) is not explicitly recorded in
the ADnode. The contents of an ADnode are simply a count and a set of pointers to
the Vary aj children.
The contents of a Vary aj node are a set of pointers to ADnodes.
1

a

 The cost of looking up a count is proportional to the number of instantiated variables

in the query. For example, to look up C (a7 = 2; a13 = 1; a22 = 3) we would follow the
following path in the tree: Vary a7 ! a7 = 2 ! Vary a13 ! a13 = 1 ! Vary a22 !
a22 = 3. Then the count is obtained from the resulting node.

 Notice that if a node ADN has Vary
Vary ai+1 Vary

ai

+2

ai

as its parent, then ADN's children are

... Vary aM .

It is not necessary to store Vary nodes with indices below i+1 because that information
can be obtained from another path in the tree.
70

fiCached Sufficient Statistics for Efficient Machine Learning

2.1 Cutting off nodes with counts of zero

As described, the tree is not sparse and will contain exactly M
i=1 (ni + 1) nodes. Sparseness
is easily achieved by storing a NULL instead of a node for any query that matches zero
records. All of the specializations of such a query will also have a count of zero and they
will not appear anywhere in the tree. For some datasets this can reduce the number of
numbers that need to be stored. For example, the dataset in Figure 1, which previously
needed 45 numbers to represent all contingency tables, will now only need 22 numbers.

3. Cache Reduction II: The Sparse ADtree

It is easy to devise datasets for which there is no benefit in failing to store counts of zero.
Suppose we have M binary attributes and 2M records in which the kth record is the bits of
the binary representation of k. Then no query has a count of zero and the tree contains 3M
nodes. To reduce the tree size despite this, we will take advantage of the observation that
very many of the counts stored in the above tree are redundant.
Each Vary aj node in the above ADtree stores nj subtrees|one subtree for each value
of aj . Instead, we will find the most common of the values of aj (call it MCV) and store a
NULL in place of the MCVth subtree. The remaining nj , 1 subtrees will be represented
as before. An example for a simple dataset is given in Figure 4. Each Vary aj node now
records which of its values is most common in a MCV field. Appendix B describes the
straightforward algorithm for building such an ADtree.
As we will see in Section 4, it is still possible to build full exact contingency tables (or
give counts for specific queries) in time that is only slightly longer than for the full ADtree
of Section 2. But first let us examine the memory consequences of this representation.
Appendix A shows that for binary attributes, given M attributes and R records, the
number of nodes needed to store the tree is bounded above by 2M in the worst case (and
much less if R < 2M ). In contrast, the amount of memory needed by the dense tree of
Section 2 is 3M in the worst case.
Notice in Figure 4 that the MCV value is context dependent. Depending on constraints
on parent nodes, a2's MCV is sometimes 1 and sometimes 2. This context dependency
can provide dramatic savings if (as is frequently the case) there are correlations among the
attributes. This is discussed further in Appendix A.

4. Computing Contingency Tables from the Sparse ADtree

Given an ADtree, we wish to be able to quickly construct contingency tables for any arbitrary set of attributes fai(1) : : : ai(n) g.
Notice that a conditional contingency table ct(ai(1) : : : ai(n) j Query) can be built recursively. We first build

ct(
ct(

(2) : : : ai(n) j ai(1) = 1; Query)
ai(2) : : : ai(n) j ai(1) = 2; Query)

ai

ct(

ai

(2) : : : ai(n)

j

..
.

(1) = ni(1); Query)

ai

71

fiMoore & Lee

a =*
1
a =*
2

c =8
Vary a 2
mcv = 2

Vary a 1
mcv = 3

a =1

a =2

NULL

a =*

a =*

(mcv)

c =1

c =3

1
2

Vary a 2
mcv = 2

1
2

a =*
1
a =1

NULL
(mcv)

2

c =3

a

Vary a 2
mcv = 1

NULL

NULL

NULL

a =2

Count 0

(mcv)

(mcv)

a =2

1

1
2
2
2
3
3
3
3

1
2

c =1

a

2

2
1
1
2
1
2
2
2

Figure 4: A sparse ADtree built for the dataset shown in the bottom
right. The most common value for a1 is 3, and so the a1 = 3 subtree
of the Vary a1 child of the root node is NULL. At each of the Vary a2
nodes the most common child is also set to NULL (which child is most
common depends on the context).
For example, to build ct(a1; a3) using the dataset in Figure 1, we can build ct(a3 j a1 = 1)
and ct(a3 j a1 = 2) and combine them as in Figure 5.
ct(a3 | a 1 = 1)

ct(a1 , a3 )

a3 #
1
2

3
0

ct(a3 | a 1 = 2)
a3 #
1
2

a1

a3 #

1
1

1
2

3
0

2
2

1
2

2
1

2
1

Figure 5: An example (using numbers from Figure 1) of how contingency
tables can be combined recursively to form larger contingency tables.
When building a conditional contingency table from an ADtree, we will not need to
explicitly specify the query condition. Instead, we will supply an ADnode of the ADtree,
which implicitly is equivalent information. The algorithm is:

72

fiCached Sufficient Statistics for Efficient Machine Learning

MakeContab( f

ai(1) : : : ai(n) g , ADN)
Let VN := The Vary ai(1) subnode of ADN.
Let MCV := VN:MCV.
For k := 1; 2; : : : ; ni(1)
If k 6= MCV
Let ADNk := The ai(1) = k subnode of VN.
CTk := MakeContab(fai(2) : : : ai(n) g; ADNk ).

CTMCV

:=

(calculated as explained below)

Return the concatenation of CT1 : : : CTn .
i(1)

The base case of this recursion occurs when the first argument is empty, in which case we
return a one-element contingency table containing the count associated with the current
ADnode, ADN.
There is an omission in the algorithm. In the iteration over k 2 f1; 2; : : : ni(1)g we are
unable to compute the conditional contingency table for CTMCV because the ai(1) = MCV
subtree is deliberately missing as per Section 3. What can we do instead?
We can take advantage of the following property of contingency tables:

ct(

ai

(2) : : : ai(n) j Query) =

X

ni(1)

ct(

(2) : : : ai(n)

ai

k=1

j

(1) = k; Query)

ai

(3)

The value ct(ai(2) : : : ai(n) j Query) can be computed from within our algorithm by calling

MakeContab(f

(2) : : : ai(n) g; ADN)

(4)

ai

and so the missing conditional contingency table in the algorithm can be computed by the
following row-wise subtraction:
X
CTMCV := MakeContab(fai(2) : : : ai(n) g; ADN) ,
CTk
(5)
k6=M CV

Frequent Sets (Agrawal et al., 1996), which are traditionally used for learning association
rules, can also be used for computing counts. A recent paper (Mannila & Toivonen, 1996),
which also employs a similar subtraction trick, calculates counts from Frequent Sets. In
Section 8 we will discuss the strengths and weaknesses of Frequent Sets in comparison with
ADtrees.

4.1 Complexity of building a contingency table

What is the cost of computing a contingency table? Let us consider the theoretical worstcase cost of computing a contingency table for n attributes each of arity k|note that this
cost is unrealistically pessimistic (except when k = 2), because most contingency tables are
sparse, as discussed later. The assumption that all attributes have the same arity, k, is
made to simplify the calculation of the worst-case cost, but is not needed by the code.
73

fiMoore & Lee

A contingency table for n attributes has kn entries. Write C (n) = the cost of computing
such a contingency table. In the top-level call of MakeContab there are k calls to build
contingency tables from n , 1 attributes: k , 1 of these calls are to build CT(ai(2) : : : ai(n) j
ai(1) = j; Query) for every j in f1; 2; : : : k g except the MCV, and the final call is to build
CT(ai(2) : : : ai(n) j Query). Then there will be k , 1 subtractions of contingency tables,
which will each require kn,1 numeric subtractions. So we have
C (0)
= 1
(6)
n,1
C (n)
= kC (n , 1) + (k , 1)k
if n > 0
(7)
The solution to this recurrence relation is C (n) = (1 + n(k , 1))kn,1 ; this cost is loglinear
in the size of the contingency table. By comparison, if we used no cached data structure,
but simply counted through the dataset in order to build a contingency table we would
need O(nR + kn ) operations where R is the number of records in the dataset. We are thus
cheaper than the standard counting method if kn  R. We are interested in large datasets
in which R may be more than 100; 000. In such a case our method will present a several
order of magnitude speedup for, say, a contingency table of eight binary attributes. Notice
that this cost is independent of M, the total number of attributes in the dataset, and
only depends upon the (almost always much smaller) number of attributes n requested for
the contingency table.

4.2 Sparse representation of contingency tables

In practice, we do not represent contingency tables as multidimensional arrays, but rather
as tree structures. This gives both the slow counting approach and the ADtree approach
a substantial computational advantage in cases where the contingency table is sparse, i.e.
has many zero entries. Figure 6 shows such a sparse contingency table representation. This
can mean average-case behavior is much faster than worst case for contingency tables with
large numbers of attributes or high-arity attributes.
Indeed, our experiments in Section 7 show costs rising much more slowly than O(nkn,1 )
as n increases. Note too that when using a sparse representation, the worst-case for
MakeContab is now O(min(nR; nkn,1)) because R is the maximum possible number of
non-zero contingency table entries.

5. Cache Reduction III: Leaf-Lists

We now introduce a scheme for further reducing memory use. It is not worth building
the ADtree data structure for a small number of records. For example, suppose we have
15 records and 40 binary attributes. Then the analysis in Appendix A shows us that in
the worst case the ADtree might require 10701 nodes. But computing contingency tables
using the resulting ADtree would, with so few records, be no faster than the conventional
counting approach, which would merely require us to retain the dataset in memory.
Aside from concluding that ADtrees are not useful for very small datasets, this also
leads to a final method for saving memory in large ADtrees. Any ADtree node with fewer
than Rmin records does not expand its subtree. Instead it maintains a list of pointers into
the original dataset, explicitly listing those records that match the current ADnode. Such
a list of pointers is called a leaf-list. Figure 7 gives an example.
74

fiCached Sufficient Statistics for Efficient Machine Learning

v=1

ct(a1,a 2,a 3)

v=1

3

a a a #
1

2

3

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4

1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2

1
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
1

v=2
v=1

2

v=3

v=4

a1

v=1

v=2

a

a

v=2

NULL

NULL

NULL

v=1

a

3

v=4

2

NULL

2

v=3

NULL

NULL

3

v=2

v=2

v=1

a

1

a

v=2
v=1

a

2
NULL
NULL

3

v=2

1

Figure 6: The right hand figure is the sparse representation of the contingency table on the left.
The use of leaf-lists has one minor and two major consequences. The minor consequence is the need to include a straightforward change in the contingency table generating
algorithm to handle leaf-list nodes. This minor alteration is not described here. The first
major consequence is that now the dataset itself must be retained in main memory so that
algorithms that inspect leaf-lists can access the rows of data pointed to in those leaf-lists.
The second major consequence is that the ADtree may require much less memory. This is
documented in Section 7 and worst-case bounds are provided in Appendix A.

6. Using ADtrees for Machine Learning
As we will see in Section 7, the ADtree structure can substantially speed up the computation
of contingency tables for large real datasets. How can machine learning and statistical
algorithms take advantage of this? Here we provide three examples: Feature Selection,
Bayes net scoring and rule learning. But it seems likely that many other algorithms can
also benefit, for example stepwise logistic regression, GMDH (Madala & Ivakhnenko, 1994),
and text classification. Even decision tree (Quinlan, 1983; Breiman, Friedman, Olshen, &
Stone, 1984) learning may benefit. 2 In future work we will also examine ways to speed up
nearest neighbor and other memory-based queries using ADtrees.
2. This depends on whether the cost of initially building the ADtree can be amortized over many runs of
the decision tree algorithm. Repeated runs of decision tree building can occur if one is using the wrapper
model of feature selection (John, Kohavi, & Peger, 1994), or if one is using a more intensive search over
tree structures than the traditional greedy search (Quinlan, 1983; Breiman et al., 1984)

75

fiMoore & Lee

a1 = *
a2 = *
a3 = *
c =9
Row a 1 a 2 a 3

a1 = 1
a2 = *
a3 = *
c =3
See rows 1,2,3

Vary a 1

Vary a 2

Vary a 3

1

1

1

1

mcv = 2

mcv = 1

mcv = 1

2

1

1

2

3

1

2

1

4

2

2

2

5

2

1

1

6

2

1

2

7

2

2

1

Vary a 3

8

3

2

2

mcv = 1

9

3

1

1

NULL
(mcv)

a1 = 3
a2 = *
a3 = *

NULL
(mcv)

a1 = *
a2 = 2
a3 = *

c =2

NULL
(mcv)

a1 = *
a2 = *
a3 = 2

c =4

c =4

See rows 8,9

NULL
(mcv)

a1 = *
a2 = 2
a3 = 2
c =2
See rows 4,8

Figure 7: An ADtree built using leaf-lists with Rmin = 4. Any node
matching 3 or fewer records is not expanded, but simply records a set of
pointers into the dataset (shown on the right).

6.1 Datasets

The experiments used the datasets in Table 1. Each dataset was supplied to us with all
continuous attributes already discretized into ranges.

6.2 Using ADtrees for Feature Selection

Given M attributes, of which one is an output that we wish to predict, it is often interesting
to ask \which subset of n attributes, (n < M ), is the best predictor of the output on the
same distribution of datapoints that are reected in this dataset?" (Kohavi, 1995). There
are many ways of scoring a set of features, but a particularly simple one is information
gain (Cover & Thomas, 1991).
Let aout be the attribute we wish to predict and let ai(1) : : : ai(n) be the set of attributes
used as inputs. Let X be the set of possible assignments of values to ai(1) : : : ai(n) and write
Assignk 2 X as the kth such assignment. Then
 X
jX j C (Assign ) nX  C (a = v; Assign ) 
nX 
C (aout = v )
out
k
k
InfoGain = f
,
f
(8)
R
R
C (Assignk )
v=1
v=1
k=1
out

out

where R is the number of records in the entire dataset and
( ) = ,x log2 x
(9)
The counts needed in the above computation can be read directly from ct(aout ; ai(1) : : : ai(n) ).
Searching for the best subset of attributes is simply a question of search among all
attribute-sets of size n (n specified by the user). This is a simple example designed to test
f x

76

fiCached Sufficient Statistics for Efficient Machine Learning

Name

= Num. M = Num.
Records Attributes
ADULT1
15,060 15
The small \Adult Income" dataset placed in the UCI
repository by Ron Kohavi (Kohavi, 1996). Contains
census data related to job, wealth, and nationality. Attribute arities range from 2 to 41. In the UCI repository this is called the Test Set. Rows with missing
values were removed.
ADULT2
30,162 15
The same kinds of records as above but with different
data. The Training Set.
ADULT3
45,222 15
ADULT1 and ADULT2 concatenated.
CENSUS1
142,421 13
A larger dataset based on a different census, also provided by Ron Kohavi.
CENSUS2
142,421 15
The same data as CENSUS1, but with the addition of
two extra, high-arity attributes.
BIRTH
9,672 97
Records concerning a very wide number of readings
and factors recorded at various stages during pregnancy. Most attributes are binary, and 70 of the attributes are very sparse, with over 95% of the values
being FALSE.
SYNTH
30K{500K 24
Synthetic datasets of entirely binary attributes generated using the Bayes net in Figure 8.
R

Table 1: Datasets used in experiments.

our counting methods: any practical feature selector would need to penalize the number of
rows in the contingency table (else high arity attributes would tend to win).

6.3 Using ADtrees for Bayes Net Structure Discovery

There are many possible Bayes net learning tasks, all of which entail counting, and hence
might be speeded up by ADtrees. In this paper we present experimental results for the
particular example of scoring the structure of a Bayes net to decide how well it matches the
data.
We will use maximum likelihood scoring with a penalty for the number of parameters.
We first compute the probability table associated with each node. Write Parents(j) for the
parent attributes of node j and write Xj as the set of possible assignments of values to
Parents(j). The maximum likelihood estimate for
( = v j Xj )

P aj

is estimated as

(10)

( = v; Xj )
(11)
C (Xj )
and all such estimates for node j 's probability tables can be read from ct(aj ; Parents(j)).
The next step in scoring a structure is to decide the likelihood of the data given the
probability tables we computed and to penalize the number of parameters in our network
(without the penalty the likelihood would increase every time a link was added to the
C aj

77

fiMoore & Lee

Figure 8: A Bayes net that generated our SYNTH datasets. There are
three kinds of nodes. The nodes marked with triangles are generated with
P (ai = 1) = 0:8; P (ai = 2) = 0:2. The square nodes are deterministic.
A square node takes value 2 if the sum of its four parents is even, else it
takes value 1. The circle nodes are probabilistic functions of their single
parent, defined by P (ai = 2 j Parent = 1) = 0 and P (ai = 2 j Parent =
2) = 0:4. This provides a dataset with fairly sparse values and with many
interdependencies.
network). The penalized log-likelihood score (Friedman & Yakhini, 1996) is

,

N

params log(R)=2 + R

n
M
X
X X
j

j =1

Asgn

2Xj v=1

( = v ^ Asgn) log P (aj = v j Asgn)

P aj

(12)

where Nparams is the total number of probability table entries in the network.
We search among structures to find the best score. In these experiments we use randomrestart stochastic hill climbing in which the operations are random addition or removal of
a network link or randomly swapping a pair of nodes. The latter operation is necessary to
allow the search algorithm to choose the best ordering of nodes in the Bayes net. Stochastic
searches such as this are a popular method for finding Bayes net structures (Friedman &
Yakhini, 1996). Only the probability tables of the affected nodes are recomputed on each
step.
Figure 9 shows the Bayes net structure returned by our Bayes net structure finder after
30,000 iterations of hill climbing.

6.4 Using ADtrees for Rule Finding
Given an output attribute aout and a distinguished value
conjunctive queries of the form

out,

v

Assign = (ai(1) = v1 : : : ai(n) = vn )
78

rule finders search among
(13)

fiCached Sufficient Statistics for Efficient Machine Learning

a_
_
t_
t_
r_
i_
b_
u_
t_
e
relationship
class
sex
capital-gain
hours-per-week
marital-status
education-num
capital-loss
age
race
education
workclass
native-country
fnlwgt
occupation

_
s_
c_
o_
r_
e
_
n_
p
2.13834
2
0.643388
36
0.511666
24
0.0357936 30
0.851964
48
0.762479
72
1.0941
26
0.22767
10
0.788001
28
0.740212
18
1.71784
36
1.33278
108
0.647258
30
0.0410872 40
2.66097
448

pars
pars
pars
pars
pars
pars
pars
pars
pars
pars
pars
pars
pars
pars
pars

=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=

<no parents>
relationship
relationship class
class
relationship class sex
relationship sex
class
class
marital-status
relationship education-num
relationship education-num
relationship hours-per-week education-num
education-num race
<no parents>
class sex education workclass

Score is 435219
The search took 226 seconds.

Figure 9: Output from the Bayes structure finder running on the
ADULT2 dataset. Score is the contribution to the sum in Equation 12 due
to the specified attribute. np is the number of entries in the probability
table for the specified attribute.
to find the query that maximizes the estimated value
(

P aout

vout ; Assign)
= vout j Assign) = C (aoutC=(Assign
)

(14)

To avoid rules without significant support, we also insist that C (Assign) (the number of
records matching the query) must be above some threshold Smin.
In these experiments we implement a brute force search that looks through all possible
queries that involve a user-specified number of attributes, n. We build each ct(aout ; ai(1) : : : ai(n) )
in turn (there are M choose n such tables), and then look through the rows of each table
for all queries using the ai(1) : : : ai(n) that have greater than minimum support Smin. We
return a priority queue of the highest scoring rules. For instance on the ADULT2 dataset,
the best rule for predicting \class" from 4 attributes was:
score = 0.965 (218/226), workclass = Private, education-num = above12, maritalstatus = Married-civ-spouse, capital-loss = above1600 ) class  50k

7. Experimental Results
Let us first examine the memory required by an ADtree on our datasets. Table 2 shows us,
for example, that the ADULT2 dataset produced an ADtree with 95,000 nodes. The tree
required almost 11 megabytes of memory. Among the three ADULT datasets, the size of
the tree varied approximately linearly with the number of records.
Unless otherwise specified, in all the experiments in this section, the ADULT datasets
used no leaf-lists. The BIRTH and SYNTHETIC datasets used leaf-lists of size Rmin = 16 by
default. The BIRTH dataset, with its large number of sparse attributes, required a modest
8 megabytes to store the tree|many magnitudes below the worst-case bounds. Among the
synthetic datasets, the tree size increased sublinearly with the dataset size. This indicates
79

fiMoore & Lee

Dataset
CENSUS1
CENSUS2
ADULT1
ADULT2
ADULT3
BIRTH
SYN30K
SYN60K
SYN125K
SYN250K
SYN500K

M
13
15
15
15
15
97
24
24
24
24
24

R
142521
142521
15060
30162
45222
9672
30000
60000
125000
250000
500000

Nodes Megabytes Build Time
24007
1.5
17
209577
13.2
32
58200
7.0
6
94900
10.9
10
162900
15.5
15
87400
7.9
14
34100
2.8
8
59300
4.9
17
95400
7.9
36
150000
12.4
73
219000
18.2
150

Table 2: The size of ADtrees for various datasets. M is the number of
attributes. R is the number of records. Nodes is the number of nodes
in the ADtree. Megabytes is the amount of memory needed to store the
tree. Build Time is the number of seconds needed to build the tree (to
the nearest second).

that as the dataset gets larger, novel records (which may cause new nodes to appear in the
tree) become less frequent.
Table 3 shows the costs of performing 30,000 iterations of Bayes net structure searching.
All experiments were performed on a 200Mhz Pentium Pro machine with 192 megabytes
of main memory. Recall that each Bayes net iteration involves one random change to the
network and so requires recomputation of one contingency table (the exception is the first
iteration, in which all nodes must be computed). This means that the time to run 30,000
iterations is essentially the time to compute 30,000 contingency tables. Among the ADULT
datasets, the advantage of the ADtree over conventional counting ranges between a factor
of 19 to 32. Unsurprisingly, the computational costs for ADULT increase sublinearly with
dataset size for the ADtree but linearly for the conventional counting. The computational
advantages and the sublinear behavior are much more pronounced for the synthetic data.
Next, Table 4 examines the effect of leaf-lists on the ADULT2 and BIRTH datasets. For
the ADULT dataset, the byte size of the tree decreases by a factor of 5 when leaf-lists are
increased from 1 to 64. But the computational cost of running the Bayes search increases
by only 25%, indicating a worth-while tradeoff if memory is scarce.
The Bayes net scoring results involved the average cost of computing contingency tables
of many different sizes. The following results in Tables 5 and 6 make the savings for fixed
size attribute sets easier to discern. These tables give results for the feature selection and
rule finding algorithms, respectively. The biggest savings come from small attribute sets.
Computational savings for sets of size one or two are, however, not particularly interesting
since all such counts could be cached by straightforward methods without needing any tricks.
In all cases, however, we do see large savings, especially for the BIRTH data. Datasets with
larger numbers of rows would, of course, reveal larger savings.
80

fiCached Sufficient Statistics for Efficient Machine Learning

Dataset
CENSUS1
CENSUS2
ADULT1
ADULT2
ADULT3
BIRTH
SYN30K
SYN60K
SYN125K
SYN250K
SYN500K

M
13
15
15
15
15
97
24
24
24
24
24

R ADtree Time Regular Time Speedup Factor
142521
162
48300
298.1
142521
783
27000
34.5
15060
150
2850
19
30162
226
5160
22.8
45222
220
7140
32.5
9672
23
2820
122.6
30000
32
10410
325.3
60000
32
18360
573.8
125000
34
42840
1260.0
250000
35
88830
2538.0
500000
36
155158
4298.3

Table 3: The time (in seconds) to perform 30,000 hill-climbing iterations
searching for the best Bayes net structure. ADtree Time is the time
when using the ADtree and Regular Time is the time taken when using
the conventional probability table scoring method of counting through
the dataset. Speedup Factor is the number of times by which the ADtree
method is faster than the conventional method. The ADtree times do
not include the time for building the ADtree in the first place (given in
Table 2). A typical use of ADtrees will build the tree only once and then
be able to use it for many data analysis operations, and so its building
cost can be amortized. In any case, even including tree building cost
would have only a minor impact on the results.

min

R

1
2
4
8
16
32
64
128
256
512
1024
2048
4096

ADULT2
BIRTH
#Mb #nodes Build Search #Mb #nodes Build Search
Secs
Secs
Secs
Secs
10.87 94,872
13
225
8.46 86,680
11
223
6.30 75,011
9
223 27.60 245,722
32
25
4.62 62,095
7
224 14.90 152,409
21
22
3.37 49,000
6
232 7.95 87,415
15
23
2.55 37,790
5
245 4.30 46,777
11
26
1.98 27,726
5
274 2.42 23,474
8
31
1.59 18,903
3
331 1.48 11,554
7
38
1.38 12,539
3
420 0.95
5,150
5
61
1.21
7,336
3
586 0.65
2,237
4
100
1.05
3,928
3
881 0.45
887
3
170
0.95
1,890
1
1231 0.28
246
1
270
0.86
780
1
1827 0.28
201
2
303

Table 4: Investigating the effect of the Rmin parameter on the ADULT2
dataset and the BIRTH dataset. #Mb is the memory used by the ADtree.
#nodes is the number of nodes in the ADtree. Build Secs is the time to
build the ADtree. Search Secs is the time needed to perform 30,000
iterations of the Bayes net structure search.
81

fiMoore & Lee

Number
Number
Attributes Attribute
Sets
1
14
2
91
3
364
4
1,001
5
2,002

ADULT2

ADtree Regular Speedup

Time

Time

Factor

.000071
.00054
.0025
.0083
.023

.048
.067
.088
.11
.14

675.0
124.0
34.9
13.4
6.0

Number
Attribute
Sets
96
4,560
142,880
3,321,960
61,124,064

BIRTH

ADtree Regular Speedup
Time

Time

.000018 .015
.000042 .021
.000093 .028
.00019
.00033

Factor
841
509
298

Table 5: The time taken to search among all attribute sets of a given size
(Number Attributes) for the set that gives the best information gain in
predicting the output attribute. The times, in seconds, are the average
evaluation times per attribute-set.

Number Number
Attributes
Rules
1
116
2
4,251
3
56,775
4
378,984
5 1,505,763

ADULT2

ADtree Regular Speedup

Time
.000019
.000019
.000024
.000031
.000042

Time
.0056
.0014
.00058
.00030
.00019

Factor
295.0
75.3
23.8
9.8
4.7

Number
Rules
194
17,738
987,134
37,824,734
1,077,672,055

BIRTH

ADtree Regular Speedup

Time
.000025
.000021
.000022
.000024
.000026

Time
.0072
.0055
.0040
.0030

Table 6: The time taken to search among all rules of a given size (Number Attributes) for the highest scoring rules for predicting the output
attribute. The times, in seconds, are the average evaluation time per
rule.

82

Factor
286
259
186
127

fiCached Sufficient Statistics for Efficient Machine Learning

8. Alternative Data Structures
8.1 Why not use a kd-tree?
kd-trees can be used for accelerating learning algorithms (Omohundro, 1987; Moore et al.,
1997). The primary difference is that a kd-tree node splits on only one attribute instead
of all attributes. This results in much less memory (linear in the number of records). But
counting can be expensive. Suppose, for example, that level one of the tree splits on a1 , level
two splits on a2, etc. Then, in the case of binary variables, if we have a query involving only
attributes a20 and higher, we have to explore all paths in the tree down to level 20. With
datasets of fewer than 220 records this may be no cheaper than performing a linear search
through the records. Another possibility, R-trees (Guttman, 1984; Roussopoulos & Leifker,
1985), store databases of M -dimensional geometric objects. However, in this context, they
offer no advantages over kd-trees.

8.2 Why not use a Frequent Set finder?
Frequent Set finders (Agrawal et al., 1996) are typically used with very large databases
of millions of records containing very sparse binary attributes. Ecient algorithms exist
for finding all subsets of attributes that co-occur with value TRUE in more than a fixed
number (chosen by the user, and called the support) of records. Recent research(Mannila &
Toivonen, 1996) suggests that such Frequent Sets can be used to perform ecient counting.
In the case where support = 1, all such Frequent Sets are gathered and, if counts of each
Frequent Set are retained, this is equivalent to producing an ADtree in which instead of
performing a node cutoff for the most common value, the cutoff always occurs for value
FALSE.
The use of Frequent Sets in this way would thus be very similar to the use of ADtrees,
with one advantage and one disadvantage. The advantage is that ecient algorithms have
been developed for building Frequent Sets from a small number of sequential passes through
data. The ADtree requires random access to the dataset while it is being built, and for its
leaf-lists. This is impractical if the dataset is too large to reside in main memory and is
accessed through database queries.
The disadvantage of Frequent Sets in comparison with ADtrees is that, under some
circumstances, the former may require much more memory. Assume the value 2 is rarer
than 1 throughout all attributes in the dataset and assume reasonably that we thus choose
to find all Frequent Sets of 2s. Unnecessarily many sets will be produced if there are
correlations. In the extreme case, imagine a dataset in which 30% of the values are 2, 70%
are 1 and attributes are perfectly correlated|all values in each record are identical. Then,
with M attributes there would be 2M Frequent Sets of 2s. In contrast, the ADtree would
only contain M + 1 nodes. This is an extreme example, but datasets with much weaker
inter-attribute correlations can similarly benefit from using an ADtree.
Leaf-lists are another technique to reduce the size of ADtrees further. They could also
be used for the Frequent Set representation.
83

fiMoore & Lee

8.3 Why not use hash tables?

If we knew that only a small set of contingency tables would ever be requested, instead of
all possible contingency tables, then an ADtree would be unnecessary. It would be better to
remember this small set of contingency tables explicitly. Then, some kind of tree structure
could be used to index the contingency tables. But a hash table would be equally time
ecient and require less space. A hash table coding of individual counts in the contingency
tables would similarly allow us to use space proportional only to the number of non-zero
entries in the stored tables. But for representing sucient statistics to permit fast solution
to any contingency table request, the ADtree structure remains more memory ecient than
the hash-table approach (or any method that stores all non-zero counts) because of the
memory reductions when we exploit the ignoring of most common values.

9. Discussion

9.1 What about numeric attributes?

The ADtree representation is designed entirely for symbolic attributes. When faced with
numeric attributes, the simplest solution is to discretize them into a fixed finite set of values
which are then treated as symbols, but this is of little help if the user requests counts for
queries involving inequalities on numeric attributes. In future work we will evaluate the use
of structures combining elements from multiresolution kd-trees of real attributes (Moore
et al., 1997) with ADtrees.

9.2 Algorithm-specific counting tricks

Many algorithms that count using the conventional \linear" method have algorithm-specific
ways of accelerating their performance. For example, a Bayes net structure finder may try
to remember all the contingency tables it has tried previously in case it needs to re-evaluate
them. When it deletes a link, it can deduce the new contingency table from the old one
without needing a linear count.
In such cases, the most appropriate use of the ADtree may be as a lazy caching mechanism. At birth, the ADtree consists only of the root node. Whenever the structure finder
needs a contingency table that cannot be deduced from the current ADtree structure, the
appropriate nodes of the ADtree are expanded. The ADtree then takes on the role of the
algorithm-specific caching methods, while (in general) using up much less memory than if
all contingency tables were remembered.

9.3 Hard to update incrementally

Although the tree can be built cheaply (see the experimental results in Section 7), and
although it can be built lazily, the ADtree cannot be updated cheaply with a new record.
This is because one new record may match up to 2M nodes in the tree in the worst case.

9.4 Scaling up

The ADtree representation can be useful for datasets of the rough size and shape used in this
paper. On the first datasets we have looked at|the ones described in this paper|we have
84

fiCached Sufficient Statistics for Efficient Machine Learning

shown empirically that the sizes of the ADtrees are tractable given real noisy data. This
included one dataset with 97 attributes. It is the extent to which the attributes are skewed
in their values and correlated with each other that enables the ADtree to avoid approaching
its worse-case bounds. The main technical contribution of this paper is the trick that allows
us to prune off most-common-values. Without it, skewedness and correlation would hardly
help at all. 3 The empirical contribution of this paper has been to show that the actual
sizes of the ADtrees produced from real data are vastly smaller than the sizes we would get
from the worst-case bounds in Appendix A.
But despite these savings, ADtrees cannot yet represent all the sucient statistics for
huge datasets with many hundreds of non-sparse and poorly correlated attributes. What
should we do if our dataset or our ADtree cannot fit into main memory? In the latter case,
we could simply increase the size of leaf-lists, trading off decreased memory against increased
time to build contingency tables. But if that is inadequate at least three possibilities remain.
First, we could build approximate ADtrees that do not store any information for nodes
that match fewer than a threshold number of records. Then approximate contingency
tables (complete with error bounds) can be produced (Mannila & Toivonen, 1996). A
second possibility is to exploit secondary storage and store deep, rarely visited nodes of the
ADtree on disk. This would doubtless best be achieved by integrating the machine learning
algorithms with current database management tools|a topic of considerable interest in the
data mining community (Fayyad et al., 1997). A third possibility, which restricts the size
of contingency tables we may ask for, is to refuse to store counts for queries with more than
some threshold number of attributes.

9.5 What about the cost of building the tree?
In practice, ADtrees could be used in two ways:

 One-off. When a traditional algorithm is required we build the ADtree, run the fast
version of the algorithm, discard the ADtree, and return the results.

 Amortized. When a new dataset becomes available, a new ADtree is built for it.

The tree is then shipped and re-used by anyone who wishes to do real-time counting
queries, multivariate graphs and charts, or any machine learning algorithms on any
subset of the attributes. The cost of the initial tree building is then amortized over
all the times it is used. In database terminology, the process is known as materializing (Harinarayan et al., 1996) and has been suggested as desirable for datamining by
several researchers (John & Lent, 1997; Mannila & Toivonen, 1996).

The one-off option is only useful if the cost of building the ADtree plus the cost of running
the ADtree-based algorithm is less than the cost of the original counting-based algorithm.
For the intensive machine learning methods studied here, this condition is safely satisfied.
But what if we decided to use a less intensive, greedier Bayes net structure finder? Table 7
3. Without pruning, on all of our datasets we ran out of memory on a 192 megabyte machine before we
had built even 1% of the tree, and it is easy to show that the BIRTH dataset would have needed to store
more than 1030 nodes.

85

fiMoore & Lee

Dataset

Speedup ignoring
Speedup allowing for Speedup allowing for
build-time, 30,000
build-time, 30,000
build-time, 300
iterations
iterations
iterations
CENSUS1
298.15
269.83
25.94
CENSUS2
34.48
33.13
6.78
ADULT1
19.00
18.27
3.80
ADULT2
22.83
21.86
4.21
ADULT3
32.45
30.38
4.15
BIRTH
122.61
76.22
1.98
SYN30K
325.31
260.25
12.51
SYN60K
573.75
374.69
10.60
SYN125K
1260.00
612.00
11.79
SYN250K
2538.00
822.50
12.11
SYN500K
4309.94
834.18
10.32

Table 7: Computational economics of building ADtrees and using them
to search for Bayes net structures using the experiments of Section 7.
shows that if we only run for 300 iterations instead of 30,0004 and if we account for a one-off
ADtree building cost, then the relative speedup of using ADtrees declines greatly.
To conclude: if the data analysis is intense then there is benefit to using ADtrees even
if they are used in a one-off fashion. If the ADtree is used for multiple purposes then its
build-time is amortized and the resulting relative eciency gains over traditional counting
are the same for both exhaustive searches and non-exhaustive searches. Algorithms that
use non-exhaustive searches include hill-climbing Bayes net learners, greedy rule learners
such as CN2 (Clark & Niblett, 1989) and decision tree learners (Quinlan, 1983; Breiman
et al., 1984).

Acknowledgements
This work was sponsored by a National Science Foundation Career Award to Andrew Moore.
The authors thank Justin Boyan, Scott Davies, Nir Friedman, and Jeff Schneider for their
suggestions, and Ron Kohavi for providing the census datasets.

Appendix A: Memory Costs

In this appendix we examine the size of the tree. For simplicity, we restrict attention to the
case of binary attributes.

The worst-case number of nodes in an ADtree
Given a dataset with M attributes and R records, the worst-case for the ADtree will occur if
all 2M possible records exist in the dataset. Then, for every subset of attributes there exists
exactly one node in the ADtree. For example consider the attribute set fai(1) : : : ai(n) g,
where i(1) < i(2) < ::: < i(n). Suppose there is a node in the tree corresponding to the
4. Unsurprisingly, the resulting Bayes nets have a highly inferior structure.

86

fiCached Sufficient Statistics for Efficient Machine Learning

query fai(1) = v1 : : : ai(n) = vn g for some values v1 : : : vn . From the definition of an ADtree,
and remembering we are only considering the case of binary attributes, we can state:
 v1 is the least common value of ai(1).
 v2 is the least common value of ai(2) among those records that match (ai(1) = v1).
..
.



is the least common value of ai(k+1) among those records that match (ai(1) =
1
(k) = vk ).
So there is at most one such node. Moreover, since our worst-case assumption is that
all possible records exist in the database, we see that the ADtree will indeed contain this
node. Thus, the worst-case number of nodes is the same as the number of possible subsets
of attributes: 2M .
vk

+1

v ; : : : ; ai

The worst-case number of nodes in an ADtree with a reasonable number of rows
It is frequently the case that a dataset has  2M . With fewer records, there is a much
R

lower worst-case bound on the ADtree size. A node at the kth level of the tree corresponds
to a query involving k attributes (counting the root node as level 0). Such a node can match
at most R2,k records because each of the node's ancestors up the tree has pruned off at
least half the records by choosing to expand only the least common value of the attribute
introduced by that ancestor. Thus, there can be no tree nodes at level blog2 Rc + 1 of the
tree, because such nodes would have to match fewer than R2,blog Rc,1 < 1 records. They
would thus match no records, making them NULL.
The nodes in an ADtree must all exist at level blog2 Rc or higher. The number of nodes
at level k is at most ( ), because every node at level k involves an attribute set of size
k and because (given binary attributes) for every attribute set there is at most one node
in the ADtree. Thus the total number of nodes in the tree, summing over the levels is less
than
!
blog
XRc M
bounded above by O(M blog Rc =(blog2 Rc , 1)!)
(15)
k
2

M
k

2

2

k=0

The number of nodes if we assume skewed independent attribute values

Imagine that all values of all attributes in the dataset are independent random binary
variables, taking value 2 with probability p and taking value 1 with probability 1 , p. Then
the further p is from 0:5, the smaller we can expect the ADtree to be. This is because,
on average, the less common value of a Vary node will match fraction min(p; 1 , p) of its
parent's records. And, on average, the number of records matched at the kth level of the
tree will be R(min(p; 1 , p))k . Thus, the maximum level in the tree at which we may
find a node matching one or more records is approximately b(log2 R)=(, log2 q )c, where
q = min(p; 1 , p). And so the total number of nodes in the tree is approximately
!
b(log R)X
=(, log q)c
M
bounded above by O(M b(log R)=(, log q)c =(b(log2 R)=(, log2 q )c,1)!)
k
2

2

2

k=0

2

(16)

87

fiMoore & Lee

Since the exponent is reduced by a factor of log2 (1=q ), skewedness among the attributes
thus brings enormous savings in memory.

The number of nodes if we assume correlated attribute values

The ADtree benefits from correlations among attributes in much the same way that it
benefits from skewedness. For example, suppose that each record was generated by the
simple Bayes net in Figure 10, where the random variable B is hidden (not included in the
record). Then for i 6= j , P (ai 6= aj ) = 2p(1 , p). If ADN is any node in the resulting ADtree
then the number of records matching any other node two levels below ADN in the tree will
be fraction 2p(1 , p) of the number of records matching ADN. From this we can see that
the number of nodes in the tree is approximately
!
b(log R)X
=(, log q)c
M
bounded above by O(M b(log R)=(, log q)c =(b(log2 R)=(, log2 q )c,1)!)
k
2

2

2

2

k=0

(17)
p
where q = 2p(1 , p). Correlation among the attributes can thus also bring enormous
savings in memory even if (as is the case in our example) the marginal distribution of
individual attributes is uniform.
P(B) = 0.5

B

P(a i | B) = 1 - p
a1

a2

...

aM

P(a i | ~B) = p

Figure 10: A Bayes net that generates correlated boolean attributes
a1 ; a2 : : : aM .

The number of nodes for the dense ADtree of Section 2

The dense ADtrees do not cut off the tree for the most common value of a Vary node. The
worst case ADtree will occur if all 2M possible records exist in the dataset. Then the dense
ADtree will require 3M nodes because every possible query (with each attribute taking
values 1, 2 or *) will have a count in the tree. The number of nodes at the kth level of the
dense ADtree can be 2k ( ) in the worst case.
M
k

The number of nodes when using Leaf-lists

Leaf-lists were described in Section 5. If a tree is built using maximum leaf-list size of Rmin,
then any node in the ADtree matching fewer than Rmin records is a leaf node. This means
that Formulae 15, 16 and 17 can be re-used, replacing R with R=Rmin. It is important to
remember, however, that the leaf nodes must now contain room for Rmin numbers instead
of a single count.
88

fiCached Sufficient Statistics for Efficient Machine Learning

Appendix B: Building the ADtree
We define the function MakeADTree( i , RecordNums) where RecordNums is a subset of
f1 2
g ( is the total number of records in the dataset) and where 1   . This
a

;

; : : :; R

R

i

M

makes an ADtree from the rows specified in RecordNums in which all ADnodes represent
queries in which only attributes ai and higher are used.

MakeADTree( i , RecordNums)
a

Make a new ADnode called ADN.
ADN:COUNT := j RecordNums j.
For j := i; i + 1; : : : ; M
j th Vary node of ADN := MakeVaryNode(aj ; RecordNums).

MakeADTree uses the function MakeVaryNode, which we now define:
MakeVaryNode( i , RecordNums)
a

Make a new Vary node called VN.
For k := 1; 2; : : : ni
Let Childnumsk := fg.
For each j 2 RecordNums
Let vij = Value of attribute ai in record j
Add j to the set Childnumsv
Let VN:MCV := argmaxk j Childnumsk j.
For k := 1; 2; : : : ni
If j Childnumsk j= 0 or if k = MCV
Set the ai = k subtree of VN to NULL.
Else
Set the ai = k subtree of VN to MakeADTree(ai+1 ; Childnumsk )
ij

To build the entire tree, we must call MakeADTree(a1; f1 : : : Rg). Assuming binary attributes, the cost of building a tree from R records and M attributes is bounded above
by
blog
XRc R M !
(18)
2k k
k=0
2

References

Agrawal, R., Mannila, H., Srikant, R., Toivonen, H., & Verkamo, A. I. (1996). Fast discovery of association rules. In Fayyad, U. M., Piatetsky-Shapiro, G., Smyth, P., &
Uthurusamy, R. (Eds.), Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. AAAI
Press.
89

fiMoore & Lee

Breiman, L., Friedman, J. H., Olshen, R. A., & Stone, C. J. (1984). Classification and
Regression Trees. Wadsworth.
Clark, P., & Niblett, R. (1989). The CN2 induction algorithm. Machine Learning, 3,
261{284.
Cover, T. M., & Thomas, J. A. (1991). Elements of Information Theory. John Wiley &
Sons.
Fayyad, U., Mannila, H., & Piatetsky-Shapiro, G. (1997). Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery. Kluwer Academic Publishers. A new journal.
Fayyad, U., & Uthurusamy, R. (1996). Special issue on Data Mining. Communications of
the ACM, 39 (11).
Friedman, N., & Yakhini, Z. (1996). On the sample complexity of learning Bayesian networks. In Proceedings of the 12th conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence.
Morgan Kaufmann.
Guttman, A. (1984). R-trees: A dynamic index structure for spatial searching. In Proceedings of the Third ACM SIGACT-SIGMOD Symposium on Principles of Database
Systems. Assn for Computing Machinery.
Harinarayan, V., Rajaraman, A., & Ullman, J. D. (1996). Implementing Data Cubes Eciently. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM SIGACT-SIGMOD-SIGART Symposium
on Principles of Database Systems : PODS 1996, pp. 205{216. Assn for Computing
Machinery.
John, G. H., Kohavi, R., & Peger, K. (1994). Irrelevant features and the Subset Selection
Problem. In Cohen, W. W., & Hirsh, H. (Eds.), Machine Learning: Proceedings of
the Eleventh International Conference. Morgan Kaufmann.
John, G. H., & Lent, B. (1997). SIPping from the data firehose. In Proceedings of the Third
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. AAAI Press.
Kohavi, R. (1995). The Power of Decision Tables. In Lavrae, N., & Wrobel, S. (Eds.),
Machine Learning : ECML-95 : 8th European Conference on Machine Learning,
Heraclion, Crete, Greece. Springer Verlag.
Kohavi, R. (1996). Scaling up the accuracy of naive-Bayes classifiers: a decision-tree hybrid. In E. Simoudis and J. Han and U. Fayyad (Ed.), Proceedings of the Second
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. AAAI Press.
Madala, H. R., & Ivakhnenko, A. G. (1994). Inductive Learning Algorithms for Complex
Systems Modeling. CRC Press Inc., Boca Raton.
Mannila, H., & Toivonen, H. (1996). Multiple uses of frequent sets and condensed representations. In E. Simoudis and J. Han and U. Fayyad (Ed.), Proceedings of the Second
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. AAAI Press.
90

fiCached Sufficient Statistics for Efficient Machine Learning

Moore, A. W., Schneider, J., & Deng, K. (1997). Ecient Locally Weighted Polynomial
Regression Predictions. In D. Fisher (Ed.), Proceedings of the 1997 International
Machine Learning Conference. Morgan Kaufmann.
Omohundro, S. M. (1987). Ecient Algorithms with Neural Network Behaviour. Journal
of Complex Systems, 1 (2), 273{347.
Quinlan, J. R. (1983). Learning Ecient Classification Procedures and their Application to
Chess End Games. In Michalski, R. S., Carbonell, J. G., & Mitchell, T. M. (Eds.), Machine Learning|An Artificial Intelligence Approach (I). Tioga Publishing Company,
Palo Alto.
Quinlan, J. R. (1990). Learning logical definitions from relations. Machine Learning, 5,
239{266.
Roussopoulos, N., & Leifker, D. (1985). Direct spatial search on pictorial databases using
packed R-trees. In Navathe, S. (Ed.), Proceedings of ACM-SIGMOD 1985 International Conference on Management of Data. Assn for Computing Machinery.
Rymon, R. (1993). An SE-tree based Characterization of the Induction Problem. In P.
Utgoff (Ed.), Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Machine Learning.
Morgan Kaufmann.

91

fi	
	fffi	
	

	!"$#%$&('*),+--'/.!012,1/3

456789:+;<-/3>=?6
#&	98+;-'

@BADC*EGFIHJFIALKGMONQPRFSC*TUHWVQXNMSKYX<TZA[TO\^]_ADT*`aN/FSbdcOF

egfBhjiBkleQf"mBn%o

prqsutuvBwLxuy{z |"xuy}8z ~}"|

 ,5U: /%U:	
"
:*j5
",>8"{{>	>
dGhn%frdOi"i"Ynn,	hnfG

x!usuy"qywLxuyz !~su"~j~z ~}|

 ,5U: /%U:(<55
"
>	Z,">G(Bd5
(	55>"{I
i"hjri^nGuhn

y>ywt!|u~Gzps

*5d",5UL%<LZ8j<
%B5((5/5%<
*5{Q>(8

(jB!
($>$j%	$U,O%$	a!	UQ!{Q8	$Q%	$U,I%L	$
 j	!(O8jU	$		$!/$	G8B$	!	$/O5!LSS		j"

%j ff
fi{8>	8	 ,j" :$!	$,L$>B$/$		jL8j
$	(   dD$,  !j$d >
 d$j
>8	 fij{$/j S>		,/
 Bj$j  ,$O j
 ( Q	 
u
 SDI%Y	 fi:Z  8$	!	> 5$*%j: j!
$$	gO,	/$j	 
  	$,S!/ /5	Qd U8jg5j
GBj$/O	{
 B: Sjj!
 "	5OB%$ 5: 	$/OO 8$
5
 $#jO%  U 5L$U	j	ug S QD>	O 
$	SO!	$$	$	!$SG I$5{$/Q5SB%jU,%u% j	$
$!$	!&
 '
 )( Y*:S$	!	$O  j ,555"(!, j
 , 
jUG8j$>$jO * /O
  G *G$	(!U	5
 +D<5{>!%$U8 O$	 8jj$$
!
 U5G	U8(5$/ 
d! :58jg$>j,
 )-B	:$,	<U O!8j%jU,
d 	$ 		!O:IL.
  jSj"  ,U UY(jU 
		$(rG
  /
 fi	O	G
   5: : *  d55<<
L>O*j.
 05%j5,(>OO*%LUO,LI	
 4/$I :!
 +D<5{(		$  S!	$
>	>OOS/L 1U5	/53
 2 j
%j8j(ju
 
5)687:9 ;</=(!>; 9
?@A:B'@!CEDGF$HICE@JK@'JGLICNMLAO/P:QffRSLUTLOVWGL$XYZ[\]^CED_B'L`LUDa@/bLA:BO3@JGLUB'L.J,AOc^LULUDdCED,`BLAOCEDGFeCEDa@LUB'LO!@
CED_`PfKgGWG@A:@!CEPD,Ah,fKPGMLhNO3QiPBIjkmlonNp8klloj!q:rsnut8kviw$j!wk:xmqy,nuyaz{c,AO!LMePDKAK|TCETCNMG}~X@J,A:@3CNO3@P$OAb{
`PD,MW,`'CETL8@PKL`'CLUD@

MLMW,`@!CEPD,O]IBLUgGBLO!LUD@A:@!CEPDP:QaDGP:HIhELMFL.DGL

CEfKg^PB@A:D@.gGBPg,PaOAsh)CED

@JCNO8BLUFA:BMJ,AOec,LULUD@'JGL:y,qI%wpzwqtlonu%kvinNqyCMLAP:Q$?LhEf_A:DA:D,M

AWG@XYZZY{IYZZ\]{

H.JGLUBLUcbAgGBPg^PaOCE@!CEPD,AhIQiPBf8WhNACOeBLUgGB'LO!LUDa@'LMcabCE@O8PgG@CfdAhWGgGg^LUBXBLhNAGLM^]$A:D,MhEP:HILUB
XO!@'B!CN`@U]A:gGgGBPCEf_A:@!CEPD,OIcbPBDdQiPBf8WhNAO/@JGL8`PBBLO!g^PD,MCEDGFPBDQPBf8WhAO.A:BL$`UAh%hELMCED
@JGLKgGB'LO!LUDa@

g,Ag,LUB$@'JGLqjywy^w%qlGw$A:D,M@'JGL_

qjyqjwP:Q@JGLPB!CEF:CED,AhQiPBf8WhNAGKIJGLKLUb

 +--5':fiufi"$##G	9:	9/S5Bff7(6
#&	#	fi

%&##i9:
U

fi^^N)GUG^EGGNGff/E,G

N

:)G!,:,G!.:GG'E_:IGU!E:.)GU:8,!.'GU:N

i EG:i!EK:.:GGE_:

!EG,

'_GKGG:!E, 


s::$:,:!EUG:NNG!_,  

EK  UKU:,K,UU^:EaGE!.

G'  d::,

:G

G   G$:GGaE_!E,.:,:d'~KGGUGU  ,,d_8EdI^
G,GU!N % 

 :'8.GU,:KGei8  8,EG:GGaE_S

,S)  'GG

GKUa  ,8:~i8  GNGKGd:  U,3GK.'eGS,:NU
GUd_^^GUa   
 _aEGEs  UKa!8  G.i8  EK  EGG
:EUG~$G's
 !K!U8:

GIE'G

 !  !EGG

sN&:,~'!E:,:NU!

KG  &8G',:e:GGaE_  Gd 

'~!,

 IEE,e,G,:!EGN$i,:SG'GU$'s::$N,:GK.'U  ^
_^$G,GU!N % 

_d,

 U,K/  :8  G,:Ge:EUi8  GI,:

N/K.  :
 ~GN',::UU%'G.KU  ,N_ %  
 E/_$:.^GU!N  !EK
:EUGU:KG  :'G$!E:E,  '  G^GUNGKG:.

GG,.U%8:

 !EG
iIG,'EG %   :,!IffG$U  ,    !EG
	ff
 : 
 fi  
   


NG'GGi, G8N
8EG,
!EK,:N^  aG~    ff  

  
 ! '~Gs  ,  E  U!,E,UGK:  E!" :,SGi'G,:  
  :,UG.:   $# %   
& '"
 eG:U'_  U::a '_::!E,!,:)(*(
,

:E/!G:.8_





a:NUa,E8E!E:,:NU!  S,:UGU:!EG8G

G/KG  :o/i8  /N3.,:U  E8GG!Uff,,U,+.-*/103254.67-829/1:

U  ,/i

# !G!EG,:dNdG

;IG!

 Ud:!N.GUGUdE,d:GGG'i,  G8N 

GU:!E$K  E'!  /i.Gs

 $K  :!E

K,IEGK!U,,!  dGU
KG!U,!e!EG,S ,E,'U=<?>  

EA;IGUU

B

8  GU

 8UG'!Ua:!E:,

ff@   :8!GK_!EU'GGG'a:

 

GaG:

 8:,GG

I % D;IGG:

I  ,:G.a,8NU %  C
 "

 K  :!EG^a 

GoG!EG:,UNEGaG:
FffF Ga:'

FF a/:NG

3EU_,N>  

I  dE  ',:G

 EUG_:id  _8i

 8,!:,G:,!IIEE,K  U~id:!E

FG U,U

F /E,  U

 _<LK:

:,G

E,8GG:,e$E,',!EG!,'

,  EKU,dKGoGUE;IGU:/:G/G

J

 8E  SE

:GGGdaG:



  'G

@ 3 %

FG H>.E,!^U

FffF E,  U

ffF G3EU3<I>  

M G,

G!!G!U_8:'_  :G

ffF 

 

   

ff@ a^::E)

8.e!:  N!G

IEUKU,,K  aE!

,!  O"UU8_:GGIGG)EiUU,.NeN3aG:.8GP% 
  $Q#	 % $  
QR#  
&Sfi &





%


K U:KIE
U :SGI, G8N EU:'$i
:o'GU),:EG3EKN
,:^U

 
; GUU

@

I!K$!U,.G  Ud'!'N:'dIEGG!EG_G

i8  E_'G.!i8  :i,!~:KUIG  .
> E,!,U'
E,  U

FffF 

:,_>  

F ^::E)J

GSG: 
T 'UN!

% d:U<VK: F 

  S 
 [ \  $  P]# ,^;IG   dK:3G,
EU
SWS   =XU#Yfi
 Z
ff@ .",:  d,:I.GU'G'  N.)GGGoG`TUNEN!_ % 

:,G_:GG'a'NaGd:.GKKG  i,!G&ff'GUGU!,  8:K!"
:'Ga'G_,Us:, 


 'Ne,:

8,

 

',:G

% $WS

 %i$a;GUU

@

3GU,!,':GSG:`T'UNE'GUKdI   

,:/NU,.GIUEEI^aE!EKGG:!E,  G',UEG

;_!G_:!EUSGs
Gs:GGa'GKG



GUUGdGoG:' 
T U'  NeG

:

 ~K  !E::EKi8  N.G!',I, %
GSG:`TUNEG  U

bc

U,GU

!U!E,K  aE!,!  U

fid$egfhHijXiffeHkmlHnoXifHpqjXrs	nQl`kHspHetpquv8egpwPnSiffxy i

z{8{}|S~	8		z~}~5z`^H|az{H{zffg|{^g`8Hzffg|P~aH|{|PH|Czff{~9~|g`)~HHgz{}~
 zff{`Z'HH{zQ	`}|P{|S~z	HZffgPHRH`|S~YS{}|~	zg~Y
8$ &QX     $       8  ffm      ff   \m Q
  S$   S   Y     ff    S , }   ff &        
 \  9'^	|S~7	Z~z||{|S~	H~|S~78}*|{}|8H|{|z`$z{|  |Y&	||SCz  |){ffY  	|
 g`{Y`{75|8H{z z~|8H|z`&	z`5	H~}H||7HHgz~|3}g`zff{,~7{|H{|S~||S  ,	~
az{P||Y	zg| `g)	~.az{Yz{|X z8~'{.H|^H{zHY|S~~Q5|^	gYH{^5zH|$	|8YzHHY`	zgQ
Yz~1zff{YzHHHH|S~|  zHgH~5Q	|{g`	|Y	75|Q_g~~g`,*|~`{,5	DZaz{
$z{H	a}~|	Q&	  HHgz~|5Hz`g`*|7HH`}|`S{|ff~|*zffH{.$z{
 ZRZ~||HzHgz{}Hzm~		|S	)g~8}z  |,$z{8zH{P~}H||z  |,|YU}	|
~'gz{Y`~}~H|8N*|gQ|zffDg'{Q&	t|YHzff{|SR)*|Hz`Hz`zg'gff|
~	H`	|P8z{}}`g~|H~^5|Y&ff~^~||{QgzffH|{*~ |S}Q~|S~Y, R\  .P  $       
 $       &  Cg  )8H|{|	7~`gH~,$z{`t`HH{}zH{`|_z9|Y	  ~|S
HH'|`S{|ff~	z$z{Q&~Z)5g`a~RzH{)HH`|S Q{|~|SHHg|{'g	z`*|{  zffHgH~`{|,H|
az{||Y	z |Pz`.H|)HH`|SHH |{  zffHg`gH|P8zff{UYzff{|3z'}H|3HRH`|S	z`*|{  zHgR
5H|S~|Z'{|zffH{H| 'gD   DzH|{5z{H~5|HRH`|`S{}|~|_H|5zA'HH{zQ	`zffg~
`g`HH{zQ	`|_H|Z5z{|S~	~\8|S}NH|~m|ff{}|SY	z.)g~zz.)~`{}	H${z
H|H|`HH{zQ`	zg~5H|||S}HQ* z`	8}'|S~)~~}H||5z{~1g`S
Q	HzHfftHH'	HHS{|ff~	Ht8z{}z{}~\X||  taz{t}`g~|S~8z|S~HzH{|S~|{|_H|
az{H{zg|{}H`gggff	H8zff{||Y	z |S~8`gYz{|S~~5g`{Yff|H|{Q ^	P      
     &     ff  m  $  	8P    3P  $      =        ,P  
S& ffm OzPzH{XHz`5	|S|zffH{XH{z z~Qff5	Q&H	~^{}|S~{Y	zg~ff~^}H|5g{~XYzHH`	zgQ&	
$|S~  	|'HH{z}}zHz`5	|S|`HH{zQ`	z PHH`}|S~
P~H|_z`&	z`5	HD|Yq'	|~H|S~~\5zH{H{}zgz~}Q=|YH  	~Z|S~	{  	|`g			|Y	
|YHg|SY|SY		Hg'H|S  |gSff	z{S  |S~A|zg~{`|S	EH|~|_	8}Daz{
$z{_~7HH`}|S  8zff{}`g~|g~}S_EgP7HHgz~|Pg`*`  |Pa{	|
~5gP,PR8H|{|PR.z|S~Hz7z`	|OHgz{8,D&^~7~5Hz5gz~}~  | g`7~5z~Q
&z|S~)Hzff=Yz{ffffYPg}H|CE.PP5H|H|HH |{`gUz`5|{P`HH{zQ	'	zg~
`{|P}H|S~| C_~1gPPRH8&	| ~)g,PR^z{3,ZPRq{|SQ&
g`Yzff{|S~P`{|,HzPHH|`azY|}H|'{Yff|C\}{YYH~Y{	H	|SCg`H{|z`5H|HH`|S~
{|S~H${zH|	H}g`H|,HH`|`g{|ff~	z_z{}Q&~~5g'*5|`{}|Pg~	HH
|AYzg}	g|~{zHgY	zE}$|ff~}}m|{~I=~~Hzff  ||Y9 |SY|SRP`g
~,gz`	|SzH,	D~g'g|{S^}H|UYzHH`	zgQ7|Sff~  &	Dz`3zH{`HH{}z}Yz|S~,5	D
~|`1H{Y|D5H|HHg|{'g	z`*|{  zffHgH~ `g zHzff=Yz{}{|S~gzffg	`g'H{Q
8Q3zP~z|^$z{3^'	YS`|g|gff	Hz,H|5HH`|7$z{m~zH}|SR Q3||,Q&
z,		ff~5	  ||YHg|SY|SR D~||=5H|zff{|`gH|P|Yg`	|}g`7z`&	z`3~Y75H|PgQ	{
  ~Hz  |8z~XYH{'|Y	Hg|{~zzHHzX~7`|YU}	|*`HH{zQ	`	zz'Hzm|Sff|
{|ff~	zU'gHRH`|S~ffz{*`|YU}	|8g`	S`	zz`.Hz`5	|S|PYz&`	z.  H7	g~|S~
H| Yz  H|SR |YU}	|3`HH{zffzZ}  H|PH{z  	|~5z'ff	`gg`PHz`5	|S|
 Y~X| .|SY	|H|S~}~*ff~XPHz`5	|S|){|H{|S~|`	z$z{Q&~?g`~\	~7~|`aH{zQ		z
H|5~	g`	zg~  |YH,zH|Y|SRffHH`}|SR`g`HH{zQ	'|SRS|S~g|S}Q&	Q$|{'{|5H  |{z`
HH'|S~YX`z	  |P|S~|S|YHg|{	|Q&	  `H	ff	H	*}zQ.z{5}~~Q.Hzm|Sff|
{|H{|S~|'	zH{z  	|~  ~'Hg`{|Zm``ff|S~`{}|A}g`Z `	ZYz|S~5	|YU}	|gY
g`{Y`}||S~.`g 95H{|S~~|S~a  Hz'YzH{~|z|S~1HzPH{z`m  ~z'ff|Y  z}g'
`g`HH{zQ`	z~g|SYY~Xz'}H|3Hz`5	|S|P{|H{|S~|`zffH{z  	|Z78~z 9|S~}|PH|8Y


fi
	fifffifi	!#"%$&('&

)+*(,-)/.&012,4331+.5,&67*831+.9:0(6;</)+*;>=;?)217;31+;<@;=:)A,-)@B.&=CB=EDFBG=;,41>)@BH>;&IJ)+*;1+;KB<L=.CM&0(,-1A,4=5)+;;
)+*(,-)L)7*;ONfi.&0=(9</PQBFDRDS=.&)LNfi;6.&H>;T;?3fi.&=;=:)@B,UDFDGVWD,-17M&;1X)+*(,4=8)+*;ZY[.&1+HZ0:D,&<L*(,4=(9\DG;9E.&1/)+*(,-=
=;6;<+<+,41+V^]_Y`.&1Q;?(,-H>3:D;&I(,UY[)+;1Q1+;3fi;,-)+;9^9:.\0N:DRB=M5<a.-Y!)7*;X<bBc;X.-Y!)7*;L1+;31+;<@;=:)A,-)@B.&=edfghB=(,UDFDGV&I
,UD)+*.&0M\*iPQ;O9:.C,-1+M&0;>)7*(,-)X.&01Z,-331+.5,\6+*CB<Z<@01+17.&0=(9:;98N:V8=;M5,4)@Bj&;O6.&H>3:D;?:B)VE1+;<@0:D)A<kB=
,UDH>.5<l)m,UDFDX9\B1+;6)@B.&=(<IaPn;C,-1+;o.-Yk6.\01A<@;^=.\)m67D,UBHZB=Mp)7*(,-)ZB)TB<>)+*;o.&=:DVq6.&HK30)A,-)@B.&=(,UDFDV
Y[;,&<bBN:D;r,4331+.5,&67*O)7*(,-)QB<S3fi.5<+<bBN:D;&f
s!t>uWv(wxfiy&z[{Jv8|Cv(}-~_y4}
 
; )SoN(;L,@-[&(\UY`.&17H20:D,f;(=;Z]+&;DHO,4=m,-=(9TL,-0)+c&Ifi&\I(&\:deB)A<a&fiUR
o)+.XNfi;X,Xa.&1+=KY`.\1+HZ0:D,Z<@0(67*T)+*(,-)S]@,:dW  I,-=(9]Ned!)+*;17;SB<Q=./.&)+*;1SS.\1+=ZY[.&1+HZ0:D,2  
<@0(67*O)7*(,-)nW q    :)+*(,4)B<I B<#)+*;<l)+1+.&=M&;<l)na.&1+=ZY[.&1+HZ0:D,kBGHK3:DRB;9N5VO&B)#B<Q6,UDFDG;9)+*;
FA4&8&U>+&:(/N:VC&;DGHT,-=8,-=(9^L,-0)7cO]&-dfQ&V5HKH>;)+1@B6,UDFDV&I)+*;K\A8&@)+.>Nfi;
)+*;SPQ;,-\;<@)na.&1+=ZY[.&1+HZ0:D,BH>3:DV\B=MOC][B)#B<6,UDFD;9T)+*;M&1+;,-)7;<@)S.\1+=ZD.-Pn;1#N(.&0=(9KN:VO&;DHO,4=
,-=(9CL,-0)+c&IJ&-dAfS,-)+01A,UDFDV&Ie.&=;>6.&0:D9o=.&)L*.&3fi;2)7*(,-)S)+*;>a.&1+=^;=:j&;D.&3fi;O,-=(9^6.\1+;>6,-=^Nfi;
;m67B;=:)@DVi6.&H>30)+;9Y[.&1X,UDFD#.:.-D;,-=8Y[.&1+HZ0:D,&<fTQ*;T1+;,&<@.&=oB<Z<bBH>3:D;&>B<k0=(<+,-)@B<b,4N:DG;TBF
N(.\)+* ,-=(9^ ,-17;20=(<7,-)@B<b,-N:D;Zq,-=(9B)B<PQ;DRD:=.Pa=)7*(,-)a.&1+=Y`.\1+HZ0:D,4;26,-=CN(;>67*;6+\;9
Y[.&1n<+,4)@B<b,-N:BFDFBG)@VKB=TDRB=;,-1a)@BH>;&f#0)QPS*(,-)BFYB<#M-Bj&;=TB=<@.&H>;H>.&17;
6.&=:j&;=:B;=5)QY[.&1+HoI5<+,UV/B=
)+;1+HT<.4Y!B)A<S<l;)n.4YH>.9:;D<QJ]JdS]b)+*(,-)#B<I:B=7Y[0:DFD9\B<@0=(6)@Bj&;LY[.&1+HOd+>(1<@)S31+.&N:D;HB<a)+*(,-)
HT,V/*(,Uj&;Q;?3fi.&=;=5)lB,DRDVTHO,-=:V>67D,40(<@;<PQB)+*K1+;<@3(;6)#)+.L)+*;
<BGc;.-Ye!]@Jdp)+*;17;QB<DFB)+)@D;)+*(,-)
6,-=CN(;>9:.&=;kB=8)+*:B<IfiPn;Z=;;9o)+*;H,UDFD)+.>Nfi;<@)X,-331+.U?:BGHT,-)+;X.\01SY[.&1+HZ0:D,f
#0)X6,-=oPQ;X*.&3fi;
)+.Z.&0)+30)Q)+*;<l;X67D,40(<@;<I*.-PQ;j&;1HT,-=5VK)+*;VOHT,VKN(;&I\B=^)@BH>;L3fi.-DV5=.&HrB,D!N(.&)7*>B=)+*;X<bBc;L.-Y
B=30)pJ]Jd[
,-=(9.-Y)7*;X.&0)+30) 8Q*;1+;Z,-1+;X<@V<@)+;HO,4)@B6LPS,UV<Q)7*(,-)S.&0)+30),UDFD67D,-0(<@;<
.-Y IJN0)X0=:Y[.&1+)70=(,-)+;DVoBG=,UDFDn:=.-PS=i,UDM&.\1@B)+*HO<L)7*;1+;>HO,UVCN(;>;?3(.\=;=5)@B,UD
9:;D,UV8N(;)@PQ;;=
)+*;L31+.9:0(6)@B.&=o.-Y!)@PQ.r6.\=(<@;60)@Bj&;267D,-0(<l;<fn*;1+;B<Q=.>:=.Pa=8&5e5&F-(&Z&(,UDM&.\1@B)+*H
Y[.&1S)+*:B<Q31+.\N:DG;Hof
*;1+;X,-1+;LHO,4=5VKB=(<@)A,-=(6;<a.-Y<@0(6+*o;=50HK;1A,-)@B.&=31+.\N:DG;HT<QB=^)7*;LDFB)+;1A,-)+017;&I:Y`.\1SPS*:B6+*o=.
.&0)+30)7[3(.-DV:=.&HZB,UD,DGM\.&1@B)+*HB<k5=.-PS=W]9:;<@3:B)+;T)+*;/Y,&6)L)+*(,-)IfiB=6.&=:)+1A,&<@))+.^6.&HK3:DG;)7;
31+.&N:D;HO<IJB)ZB<X)71@Bj&B,UD
)7.^.&0)+30)Z)+*;K(1A<@)><@.4DG0)lBG.\=edAf8Q*;H>.5<l)LY,-H>.&0(<k.&=;TB<X)7.6.\H>30)+;
&[@&U+&L@2T57[&@(T]BG)7;1
.&)+)lDG.\NIU&&:dS]@<@;;L)+*;X33(;=(9\BF?CY[.&1
,>9:;(=:B)@B.&=
,-=(989\B<+60(<7<bB.&=.-YS)+*:B</31+.&N:D;HdAfTL<LPS,&<3(.4BG=:)+;9E.&0)XN:V8JB)+;1>,-=(9W.&)+)@D.&N]A&&dAI(HT,-=5V
;=:0H>;1A,-)@B.&=E31+.&N:D;HO<X,41@B<bB=M^B=8AIJ9,-)A,-N(,\<@;<I9\B<@)+1@BN0)+;96.\H>30)A,-)@B.&=I,4=(9C.&)+*;1Z,-1+;,&<
.-YS.\H>30)+;1/567BG;=(6;&Ih)+01+=o.&0)
)7.ONfi;2Pa*(,-)
PQ;Z6,UDFD!B=C)+*:B<3(,-3(;1ChnLnhak!b5&@&I\B=
)+*;L<@;=(<@;S)7*(,-)I-BFY!)7*;VO,-1+;
<l.-Dj,-N:D;B=O.\0)+30)3fi.-DV5=.&HrB,D)lBGHK;&I5)7*;=O)+*;a)+1A,-=(<@j\;1A<+,UD(31+.\N:DG;H
B<aDFBG\;PQB<@;O<@.-Dj-,-N:D;&fXb)<@*.\0:D9N(;Z=.&)+;9o)+*(,-)1+;6;=:)
17;<@;,-1A67*C3(,UB=5)A<L,K1+.5<BG;13:B6)+01+;ZY[.&1)+*;
SQLk&#&  31+.&N:D;H^IJN5VW<@*.-PQB=M^)+*(,-)B)>6,-=8Nfi;m9:.\=;ZB=&5e5b++&(U([&[Z
]g1+;9:HO,-=^*(,&67*:BV5,-=IJ&&dA&N0)L<@)@BFDFDI(=.>.\0)+30)+[3(.4DGV:=.&HZB,UD,UDM&.&1lBG)7*HB<S:=.-PS=f
Ze:U(

fi 
 =:0H>;1A,-)lBG=M,UDFDn67D,-0(<@;<.-Y)7*;2a.&1+=C;=5j\;DG.\3(;Z.-Yn,TM-Bj&;=C<@;)X
.-YH>.9:;D<aB<

SQLk&#&
[*(,-1A9efQL<#Y`.\1S)+*;Xa.&1+=^6.&1+;&Ifi<@;D;6)@B=MO)+*;ZS.\1+=^6.&1+;Z],4H>.&=MZ)+*;L3(.:<+<bBN:DV
;?3(.&=;=:)@B,UDFDVHO,-=:VXB=(6.&HK3(,-1A,-N:D;L.&=;<dPQB)+*T)+*;SHT,U?5BH^:=50HZNfi;1n.4YHK.9:;D<][Bf;&fI&)+*;.&=;
)+*(,-)Nfi;<@)n,4331+.U?5BHO,-)7;<deB<Q6.&HK3:DG;)7;&&Y[01+)+*;17H>.&1+;Q;j&;=O,4331+.U?5BHO,-)lBG=M/)+*;SHO,?5BHZ0H
PQB)+*:B=,4=5V6.&=(<@)A,4=5)S1,-)@B./B<6.&H>3:D;)+;&f
1+.:.-Y_<K.-YZ)+*;<@;81+;<l0:DG)<,-1+;CM-Bj&;=N:VL,j:j,\9\B,\<IL,-3(,&9\BHZB)+1@B.&0,4=(9-B9:;1@B]AU&&:dA,
j&;1A<BG.\=X.-Y()+*;Q<@;6.&=(9k1+;<@0:D)IUB=>,
9\BF;1+;=:)!H>.9:;D(,-=(9X6.5<l)61@B)+;1lBG.\=I-P,\<<@*.-PS=LB=(9:;3fi;=(9:;=5)@DV
N:V^n,\9:.-DFB]A&\:dAf


fi[(:&\E5&U-p8S(Lfi


	fiff


!"	#%$&!	'!	)(*!+
(
!	)$,(*"	-	./!	#0'$1$2!	345.6ff&7ff8
(	#92:;	#7<5"=	fi>$	#?@.ABC@4	)@D.E!,F$#GH(I	#7J5"=	%
8
	#K.E87'
LMJONP-Q$-R
"	/$!$
2	)(S!&"	?.T$1U#	/"
(	)(>"R%,$%-Hff$@CQV;9MWO	?NQX!2ff2

8	Y,
	#NZ$	#.
.[!,'$<2\DJ>]^!0	RG8
	?!	)$Q.X_a`cbde[fhgCij?kl)m)fFn#f'giQ
o
N	)(p	?"$	?<D"R2!
	

	#Nq4.[!SrJM9s
	#!	78	?%R2.[!%tP'$S$r8
	?-!	#!
8	?.[Q
(
@
pfi(I!	#0F$u4
p
o
tN4	)(p	v"$w	)$#9Txy4$)G-.H<{z?JfiF$$!@'$1|"	G!
	#%-H}1N!2!
	v$u4
p@4	?	~ff	#
S.{W4$u4	#8)G
) 

!ff!
	)$K(	|
	2<+\JD8%"=	7
8	)ff8F$w	4RO<{z?J}6N	/@.E!	#+"
?!
	2(F$wffO"	#N	#	#
2$	#.H.[!,'$(I!
	vff
ff  9G$

=C$	/8Q<{z?J+'$Q
$8'$1|"	9
 96S!
	Y@

!Cff82!!
(ff	)(S"CRSxp{G
P%@{G(X(H} ) G('!	#	'"!	)(
r"RDQ$"=	#!pD} ) GN	/o	7<I\J*!2"	,
?S$1
p	%$	#K.T.E!,F$#G
"

?!
	,$	#
.-T%~4SH$
"$	#$@.<*!Q!	/ff$1'$!	#vN!rJMG
N48rJO(
(	)(>87	)ff!{9
 9WO	v$-{ff$1'(	#
	#!	Yj2!	Qff

-RS2	)
p.[0t@'Cff#-	)(SW?!]
.E?NQ
	#
h
6(
"
![8
!NQh![
]>NQ'ff!r<\JfiF$!
	2f'g=e[l)k8nl)e[fhg?@.H!
	?%~%
$	#$2	#
	)(5}  9
 9Q
	/"0	?

!ff!
	)$8	Y$Rff'ffG>!!
	#R>(	|
	/8
	v
;(
!	)(S.[!,'$B	~
P'ff
4w4R9K
	/8	#%
pr

!Cff8
	)$Q8	7$	#%@C'ffG;(>8
	#Rr(	|
	3<I\J4P'ff8RO"RS$
$	#?.Q2
(	F$&M}u<+\J  Gyp0	#D5!	#!%$j.s!
	>$	#?.Q2
(	'$&.v<TG{M}u<  G@(D!?.
JHGH}J  ]
'ff	r!@)GM-.7<{z?J'$,
$!@'$1|"	G!
	)$	+uND$	#$28	r(F$Eu)9^-Q|0	


!Cff8
	)$To	M}u<?\>J  !/"=	7ehl`k#le[f'g/.{M}u<  2M}uJ  G!
	v$w
"$	#.{H}J  !
F$ff8C$	)$wQ!,M}u<  ](S!
	#R%(-{	#>!
	Q
w4$X@.>
!	)ff&(O#ff8C$	#
	)$!$a9
6+C!{$}  (S?'6$} ) 2
(	'$#G
!
	K
!	)ff'$!
	?$
"$	#.HM}uJ  !
ff!	#0	)$&,%v('$@ff	2.[!dg,2
(	X^M}u<  }[?tFt$?&'$&,4,
K2
,
pr(F$wff	G;^C@!{$,%s$	#![8
	#!	#'ff,(-	#8	#ff	  9,6OAB!p'(

$&} )c (
x
!"
$a$,}  2c(	'$#G!
	%
8	)ffO'$,8
	fi$
"$w	#2.QM}uJ  82ff!	#0	)$&,%
(F$wff	.E!n,l,2
(	X5M}u<  }4^x
!"
$K&'$/34,
v@2,
pO(F$wff	Gy
AX!p'(

$,%$w	#![!
	#!	#wFff(P{	#!	#ff	  92xy4tPRGMW$1	#!)$&}  

!Cff!+'$?
0t'.XAX!p'(

$#GrNFff8>!
	%
8	)ffjF$
!	.[	#!!	)(S0	#!
	K!	#$	)ff+	#0	#
P.X<{z?J+'$K$!'$1|@"4	9
!	#@(2K!"} ) 	#,"!o?,?$R
$!	#%wFffB$!(R&.!
	sff2	~CR&F$8$
	)$yC0@40	)(
2!
	0t@$y.E!%-'$%$y.[M
(
!	)$T@(/8	#0'$1$#9B
	#R7$
N^!@H!	--
p/NQ
	#8
	#X<\7J^ 
 R%@.!
	)$w	7

!ff!
	)$Y}6!'$'$oC
NQr$!
	%_ge[lk#d)e[_d`kC#-l  '$vff4	#8	/.[
	#0	'$&^!
	SR
,'Q	#ff8CR*"	#R(^Kq]!j'$,!$8)RGM
=		)$!$1Rff2	~GB	#0	#
(	#,!@v6ff2	#!	S
!"	#%$#9+W
	#<(*J!	SQ8{G@(J*'$&.Q"
(	)(^$u4U#	G
M!	#2(K!"} )c $
N8
	4R=C$10	>!	)$>}.E,(0	#$w	fiff4	~R!	)$w4$#G
	#0	#5^	~
!!	#2	R^$12	ff#$	)$aGM

!Cff8
	)$  (  GX$	#	>
	#8	#  !$3}[  (}[- 
"	N  
	2
!"	#F$jR
,'O!
	%@

!Cff8
	)$  92F$&$	#	#%$?K|$7$1p?0	#!R

!3F$u4
p=G$1ff	&Ns	/@!	KC!	#8	)$!	)(S+
(

pr!r

8)~%$"CRS"
(	)(I.[!,'$#9

	?
!"4	#'$Q8/ehCl,_a`cbde[lbK#k,_-dn7ld@nl,!lf'gi,?kgI}6!K}[-- ! 9
W*	7$
2SU#	,!
	,
	#pC0	&!	)$$KpX8%!'$K=	#/$.E-Nv$&}u$	#	&!
	,v
=	#(-~
.[Q!
	?
!.6$#L/}P-  F$K>	)$wR%"$w	#!0tw4rNQ'ff8rN	Kff84(	&.[vff4	#8	#
	)$!$ 
,;K 2


p%<I\JHGNQ
	#!	/<F$K2$	#.!S.[!,'$Q(>J+'$Q!S.[!,' 
}[  $vQYjYBK?:;[(Ir!
	/x=p
6P%@
[X(Q$";	#!p*} ) L ) 

!Cff8{9
)

fiv=='{c
#
=XF

'
HB


[ -[/uTX Q X=[6 2#!I^!
%?!

8C  
 68&Fas&,O
!4#

!!!)E4Q
+!
?!# 	w/
X  ^
   4KQ+2)fiff
[--[D%8)[!'!K!K
!Sr!
&2
  )r

8C  
)ff
 #C
%T8vP[=    5
s#=
r>@r  "!$#%&

#'
#!?

QC
( !#,*)K!5,+--.,ff0/1=#!!rfi+--2

v?!@)3
)!&!
,
,'Q#  C
 -')#3!

@!)Q8)[!'!I4

#8#C>fi4

#'M#
!&ff
567
8:9<;=>?=8A@BDCEF=9<GA>?H:IJCKB@IKG&8
O2

 )  >
,  
#2L[&!#
!)#


 !=C1MC

)I%

#,!




=!K@F*

!N4C%@!/!)
+,
 6 
L
;
!)fiO)8'1ffP?2LQ
/!#
8)#CK
'MC

)R!+ST!UE!FWV XX@ V X ffO2!!
,
!  )!
  2<

D!
Y!O#$=r  !2Zv!
4'[E8\'FV3]y  
!
^w!  

 2<
  Cw&^!#8$s%j4uFwX!QQcM8_!S	Q80[!'<ff


  /!@W7!/u PZ<1
>
{c4+!V X  V  X %%
Q
 )!!wP`,!

!r#$=3@ !&
s	[!'LV X"a !
#r!,12 $##C	

=#,K)
M=s

s#ju!  #=

QZ!
	M

)0	
>!#
!)w#C!)3ff

#D!
bE8\'''

@!)`C+!
RE8\'dc X ;!
,
e

=#/I4
#	

?!
f[-
vg
V XhDi gkj V Xl c Xm
V XhDibgkjnV X l c X o
 #!*p l0q #
!)>^
D
/!
F

8Y[!S-Fw%>'  !) 1!
rfir{  S
7!
`

8

[!%-' D
/  
#23F&'  !)ts  vu
fiff/K'#y!
,
w

#R
Fj!

!r#$=2
X!
R

!)`

=#0
;{>!
,
qx#'
FK8
\!  !/

!
'

8),
#:
3ffWy144##C
28FfM

)v8#
!)#S
!=C!
!-)Q  2<

S!
0Q!%#$=)v  !)
_
;
!)`Q8dE8\'zffH*?!
#!fi[!


Z"
!>878F  2<
H
8#Yff
yd
#+!
R1  ')
{

,!'sRQC!T
;
!2dQ8[!'TV*r



{|k}~ c`j"_f_,ff:/# 1'#B!
B4!#!)w
 BLQ TV&	c'
8'J



!
#!fi[!	V d'Q!!#>VFj	y	V<[s2![!'0V3=
T$
%@Tff
 uF#?

 %2
 ZV a K'
X!
	[!jw++  Q
#!d++jFK8
/!"
8Ytt1
)

WF=Hd{'?8
2!#%
r@!?
s8
22
ffS
22
'?
Wc5!?!  Cw)
!j4jK82>,
v@2,
2Fw  /3>,4S#Qkr{#!#  B  !)d%-
2

!  
)v!,!
,sS2
'\+  *+  ff7M
M
r!

5x#Y-X2
'?

VT!
	[!S-Fw%YX!'
2+
"<
)y    28WV l cH!
	

8)
[!'
M'SSj
 S	V  ffO1,',)*!O#>!,!
Q!#$=r
v8F\E8\'I''
"__
S	V  $Q-,!
0!  !K'!
#	R_$	V  $R_	V  ^n    
C?!
#

?
T!
?ff
P?dD2#Cw4
) !
+!!
$  {Kk2!
v

@!D'rt!2-  {2  Z
cj S	!vVOZX!
RE8	yR_	V68
\

=#/Ix#?

!N44SK!
!
)g V l c^'IS	 S	V  fQ-4vV l c 'T&S? S	V  T$&Se S	V  ff

#
#tP)w483@"!!!d[!'F$zff



fi$<:<x<:y<:N
<<nvW$	D

3$DN D<T["Fyfi1T
Ffi\Z"<<D<Z"L
WWY"$*$_
"
''LJ<
LW"Y
L
&	W<"ZJD
$<v
$T<	
<	RL$fi
<D<Z"	"TxdWN0
x
fiL<<"`k<
1
 N 3fiA,T<<$Y_'*_'*$_RvfiDNfi<&:Y
tfi<<""L
  	  tNK	  R_ ,3 AW<"T:$<R$v ,3
   <L3:
vT<fiN<`
k<
0LyFJL$<"<<Y<\
N<0  
   
 N    
  fi3  yY
yL$fi

_`:Z_"<[
f d$W< d$WRL<$fi&
_3:<	1$L<$fi 

U" K"1'
L<L,
fi0
$TNk
 &"fi

"'"<RKW<"	Nk
"d$1fi
 fi



fi



 	



ff








 
:N   
:N
   f
   :N
 
[xNy<0
"	"<	$fi[
<'\$L`	  [<"
 ?_fiNK_,3fz_N
_,3Yz,N__fi3TNSfi3N 
n
[fi&x" S1 <D<
L"Txd_ 
  w  ! #
" fiY   ["F"$<3
NY
T
  $ 	3Z %   : 	3''& Y"<"fi"fiL<<"F"<Y$fi

 fi"

 )K( d<Y+* fi$F"nF"Z"<Fy"S1$tfi"d
#
 
"F"<`"$
-,/
. -, 3NS
S,10 fiDN32 4   65 Z"$
%     N ,/.  ,3 NK  RS , 0 ,3 S	 7
8 Y<0"<[
Y
$dL$fi
"<0$fi0
9n fi"<''     eN? fi3 4b
W' fi3 :
 
YZ:<	Z      
; x_"< 0ZW"
#U?S ,3 0     N  D  
( U'<y
0
LK <"'W<T,3Z:"<YJk

  
Y
_		-<  J	
	  
 %
 `3  
Zyd\$<$"F
<"<[<	
>x=  N N   @? <y
"3
ACBDFEHG@I-JKG@G@E'LNM
< bL$k1"
fi"y,xfiL$k
dT<WKfiW
J<
0WT
'<D<
"

RZ"R<&"	6
* 1$	3LNkyL<$fi"<" "Txd-OQP@ROTSVUWYXZ![]\^_Y`+OU7UQa _
b
c 
"$f""<WW6* 1$Lfi<"$"	<fLW$fiNDW"L Z6d]ve 
<fi<Z"<W"Z:"<	
f<y
1CK( fiy<<y'"
df"<fi@Sf <fiZA,N
^gOhiU7\j:O 
"L<0yJk",x L"<`y

:
&"<f"w   J	  	  
W<"  N  
"L"<dxZ
$L
<Z<Yt c J$L$fik:N
d
Cf
& W

W<\y'F
<Y ,
fi0$fi
l
d <\
mU/noOqpfiXrO
`sU/noiUtnoiu_wvQO
ZX@_fi\/^
U/noX@_QO]j
iZ\/ioxQ`+Oy_zipfiX^oh J|{sno\/RQn}R6XZ6ZOQ_HS~X^rU7X|i|pfi\/^g\/pmopno\/U7U7\^h _YOUXW#U/noO]R
`+i_YOy_
SfiS $W,Z


$fi,9
 x"
'$\< $"<YWZRK
k
:,f'
'"
[y"fifi,'NkfiF"<	K
kZ	[TNk:Wy"J$0A<Y"<R$\<
$"<ZRK
k'fik17$
 <
WF 
,d<"$1  
"
 $fi<"fi"



fiN~-Q-K---tg-
 6++-9-Q-Q>-#Q6g3@N-3-V-@
z7mm7#-ff-gt@gkg~6Q
9	Fgum-ug6@>q
m-t3
@Qom]-9-Q	-Qwt3-3ou

@#mm-'Qm-]Q>:@|6o3C'6Q!-QCwg3-@

mVgN! --T-]	-z Qo6g@K	-fi--@m@]	fiqo -6-
 -g6@C-Qo@Tw	ug
> -w-	-g>kl	+t37g@
6t-@QQ
sg@mgu-
m
Tq

zg@m-]-V-u@|@--
g-g
o-mgQ!@9@Tu
y4]]6QQ6
7]//]kg
+6~#6] k6
Qm+y~7Fy3Y6mo+|/g
]!K@ gz	
m#
6Q+Q6	#V76/
~@m7/m>+gk-67g
-V-@+:---3g@-mC
@96-QgQg|-m-fiQw@K@@@
QmHF-kQ!Nw@ @w@g|	g
Q-@-m
-Q-Q-
T
!omC>	VlF9-	-6  
6->t-t%TQQ

	Q
36g@-w-fi-ow-g-g
|@Tuo399-@9|'6Q!
-Q	Q
 @ @g mgqfiguC
k@g 
3	g@kmk#-mQ-Q6
Q
 zV	 ff 
fi@| Q lV 
!u
" g-tgt~67gT
w--@t7+y@9m->-!>-C-t-V-@	Q	
-]Q-	
Qo6@	-Q$ #&%K

 6--ugw( '%	Qg6 '> 

69	
-QuQFm-@@@gYK	-Q#@--Q!@
HQ@-  -]-gQ	
g@* )  + , )N>Hg@yggu-. -6--Qw@g>Q3g-g /qgQ
 |-m@--Q3|-

H@
6>mg9gk	Q-
#gg66
0 2 134
56
4 C8 7 Q* 95:<;gwm	g@-37+sFw	
qg@= 95:<;k/7/
t+79@m7m
>  ? @g] -k7@+-#-@-Q> >A@ ?z :} ,  > :}l @ B ?C:N
mVgE
 DV  F )  + , )lg@g#-k--@k7#+Tg
#3--Q. ) 5 GH + , ) I GH@
J  6 7 Q8 Kmsgmg	g@ )l , )  @ Km -QN->kg
)" I GH , ) : , B )  @ Km' :}g , L )  :}' @ L Km :'
]	-w-Q>g@g
) I GH=, )  : + , )  : + , B )  :}gH @ B Km :gH + , B )  :}gH @ B Kz :gH
ug#-Q67< ) 5 GH<+ , )l5 GffH@
 gHQ6 ; 37+ @Hg
!--T6gN k!g
Qugso}6gN
-kQ>@-6>@ )M:]-gQC7#+T >	--]@Q9+N-6O N @P )|ulT
7-g6@8 N Hg@6K	-%Qm@9-6m@ff g@m@]	
mQ N ( RK-Qg6K  -g6
'gu3yC-}uq~66w--
zQS :w. T97	-g@6s gHQU ; 	+ !-
m-67g
!7+ 9->( '%	QosQQ@qm-Qt@ -u39	z	@gT
-V-u
>69gQ -QQ
 V- Wk>-37@+-#6g@fiQg@	
Q--kQ#-
7-]-67g
 7#+TQk 	
@-66Q-Tg+ -}Q|9	X ))@g @
6gH	Qo
@w--@g]q
]#Hg@g9		-k@Qg-g'+
m]-k--Qkg-g
YOd Z [ \a\@f^ d ] --goTkg@C>uC>#9H--'9N7ma- d )`_ ,  @ba B c!a\@  @*d d B c! aOa\@@
de  B c!7fie >|-6 -]--QV-@	-o#-6 9@, g!e Q oc 6e a g3@g w@-g= ) _ @,ouc fi@-g  7)-_ , --@e $ g
B 	c!Q e H

h6i

fijklnmoqpro2ksutvxwroylz{pr|q}5vUt$s}!zkz{~kzn*v6o2ffo
qU!Lq556^q n*A$   yfn
6Ln!L685q*6n2MI	$yqS$36LSqqU*U6nI5$
(8q$^U!O5nI6n(q6Lq255$3q
f<n5n5L$3.*q8ny6=25n5*5$8q!$3(2Lq
Bq\6$n6\$4qrq^q(qI5!rq*5n6LIqMqn5.rOyL
$B25B$5qr25<$5q(5r6*`$q((qS5=5!nnq(5qn5$5nqS!U5L5
U5qqI2ff$IOqqSn!qn!$L6f5.5563qU!L.
U$u644\U64
 $q  6$ff$xq(5$	Uqq6q2n5yn(6$5n6LL5U5$I2U$r
6LnL5.OqqSn!$q$(5qnqLq6UUq68<xOqqn!$I
(qnSU55 *L*$3!<n5(y!L6S =!*n62L(.qLqn$ !L  n 5L5n!$L5q   $^L5*U56LSn(L!	 *\$$

!Fff 
fi fi  5n56 fi  fi  Un!Su6<yBIn5L$8$5ufI
U5L5q6yL5q$   M6Ln=5<n In5ufL$3n(!  L$
=  rn!^q LqyL6My $q 6$q(5$x6q2n $u56
n!=L    $8nqLq6US6263   $ .L$6$5O! q(L5SL
$Pu\(IMyf$  $$qO*6y62 $P$nLL$  <$
OqQ$b.S6Ly6.Sq<L5(L5n.$q(L!<Mn(!=$y
qSn!$q<$<U!L {n568L$5*qyBIqSn nIqn$$y($q*$
$q(L!n(F6Ln$I2S!\$\53U5$8q$5nqS!U5L5<$n(L5q  q
 6$^$q(65nI$^A$65qn2^q623qn2 !qnuyq$48$2(L!LL!On(!^$qrOqMq
!$q<n!=6nI<u$63IM62!$(5yBIn5L$=ff$6*$q!5q$
*nq= !5yI2q8q(L!LOn(!$4*q(q*$Snq(5qSq^
n$rL* =2"  
# nffU%

$'&)( nI6+ *f *\2br$4$(q(L!LL!On(^$4fIn6(L5q`L<Oq
LO$rn( !  -,  $ffq8(q6I$5yqurL5q$5q.$2(L!LL!
n(!$  $yL*$   
. 5U5q5*=q**!<5SyqOq$/ n5$L5qq6q
0 1 r*2$\!2qSn!q\5$^yLL=5U!^Lq2 OIqqL$3 y5L5q
$n!$q655S!$.(qn5 nIL IM625n.qM(5.Oq (2y$U!L
$Lu5S!$=ff$n5LqL56qyL=3<u6282!$65.q 5 4
 (88<(2n5 y5LQn<2qn$L!U5.2<nS*$\IU!O5Q<ff1 
L7 6=q$!SUq1 8n
: 9<;\> =6@ ?[
6Ly65	n!*$2yuq*qn5*$* A1AffL B$!SqL($1 CD CFES$ALH G
I !1 C{K JML	AqqN O5qqAUqL	$<62	$(qLL5nSqn5!!$q(5
5yq($n5q2qQu2!n6SQ(2$L5qu56q5n5Qq!Ln5nI6$
$nqn5(qP OD C(*2nIQ OIqqqy5L5q(qn5 nIL6Ln5=$(2R 6
.5$5!$Lff62O$<2Sy$<nb!*5 L<(2$L5qu56q5n5L
qyU
S1T

fiUVMWMXZY'[\^]`_	]`aMX:bcXed`f`XZV`gh[-i<j1X:ak1f`X
lnm`oqpsr3t:uwvxo/yzm`uRtey	r|{n}~o	uw~`x}R{o	pr3tZo/R}1`)}1xtevx}su~M}{:Fu`}1pter|{vtpor3{:1}1
t:vxm`p}1'y }1pP~``vt:u`vxm`o+}1xuo	uR1o {:}1~o)ruy }xo2}ruF}1xu}1xp7R{Zr)Qm`o	u`~@`rvxo/M/zo	1tZo/
 t:uruF}vxm`o71o}xpr3{"tZp	pP}Rvt:uRvxo	xo/vt:u`{:t:ut:u{:o	vxv/H1Mz1R1 7	17R"1
woy }1uo/y vx`xo5vxmrvQyzmr3{:1}t:vxm`p)o RtZv/
 `Pr~`~`z}Fr1yzmwxo/~M}1u`5vx}`~@`rvxo/7ruxo	1tZt:}1uF~`x}`Ryzt:u`r~`~`x}3Rtpsrvt:}1u5}Qvxm`o
Ru`}|n{o/Ror1oQmRtZyzm>Mo/y }1pPo1Qntvzm>u`o	`~`rvxo/	)pP}1zorupP}1xos{:}R}Fo1rvx` r3{"{1nt:v
~`r1y vtey	r|{r~`~R{"tZy	rRt"{"tZvwxo/v Q)t:vxmvxm`oPr3{"t:vK}cvxm`o/oPr~`~`z}/Rt:prvt:}1uH'ruNvxm`o t:5o R{:u`o/x
t:uzo/r1}1uRt:u`lnmRtet:pP~}1zvruRvqr1~Mo/y v7}Q}1`~`x}~}Fxr|{+m`}1R{Zoso	|r3{:rvzo/wo `~o	t:pPo	uRvr3{"{:1
 y }1pP~R{:o	pPo	uRvrxQr3}+o	r3{:rvt:u`wvxm`oPo 'o/y vt:1o	u`o/z}+}1`7xyxm`o	po)}1R{ZMovx}r~`~R{:t:v
vx}7)o {"{vxt:o/t:vxrvt}uQruo rp~R{o/+tu  t:uNQmRtZyzmNxo/r1}uRtu`tur7RRurp7tZy	r3{"{:N`~`rvzo/
)}1{ZtZQ)o {"{:Fu`}Quvx}PMoyxmr3{"{:o	u`t:u`'yzmrczo/r1}1uRt:u`Nr}1`vr1y vt:}1u'
 12cMc'M1
worxo)t:uRo	`vxo/vx}q)rxv)1o {:pruP}1cpsruF5m`o {:~RR{hy }1pPpo	uFv}1ur~`xo {"t:p7t:urxs1o	Kt}uP}'vxm`o
pruRxy t:~`v/`ruvx}7vxm`oxo	to	)o	}1Qry	rzo R{hrur|t)o	r3{:rvt:}1u'  ~`xo {"t:p7t:urxN1o	Kt}u}
vxmRtZ+}xPQr1-~`xo/o	uRvxo/st:uvxm`oP/1  }1uRo	xo	uy o1
 cQMc-
 z^3   K)  tZruRt:vxoo	v})u`}^Ro/  'vx}1o	vxm`o	)t:vxmwro	v}+mRF~Mo	xo/R1o/  
Qm`o	xoo/r1yxmP5  tZcr`o	vc}  ntvzmrv{:o/r1v2v)}o {:o	pPo	uRv	-l)mFH1r1r~`mtZ-rmFR~o	xr~`m
t:umRteyzmr3{"{mRR~o	xo/R1o/rxoQ}hy	r tur|{fft:vsvK)}  1`	/3x	132}hrmRF~Mo	x1r~`mPtZ)rp7t:uRt:pr3{
mRt:vxvt:u`No	vQ}hvzm`omFR~o	xo/Ro/Q}cPRvxmrvctZ	@r7o	vQ}2u`}`Ro/)vxmrvQmr+ru`}1u`o	pP~`vPt:uRvxo	o/y vt}u
)t:vxmr|{ff{@mFR~o	zo/R1o/t:u  1ruPyzmPvxmrv2o/r1yzmP~`x}~o	+`o	vtZ+tZD}t:uRv2x}1p}1po+mRR~o	xo/R1o1
lQ  1-  tZ7vzm`os}{"{:})t:u`y }1pP~``v rvt:}1ur3{Q~`x}1R{:o	pQt:1o	u>rmFR~o	z1r~`m'-~`x}`Ry o
vxm`oNo	v7}r3{"{Q}Qt:v5vx ru1o	zr3{Z	  v5teu`}1v7Fu`}QuQm`o	vxm`o	7vxmRtZ7~`x}R{o	p%y	ruMo}{:1o/t:u
1   D ^ffM17Z1  D7/`vzmrv)tZ	Rt:uvt:pPo~}{Ru`}1p7tZr3{t:u}1vxmNvzm`ouR`pqMo	}mRF~Mo	xo/R1o/ru
vxru1o	xr|{eH  uso	uF`pPo	 rvt:}1us~`x}1R{:o	ptZQy	r3{"{:o/NlQ  1c  mrtff2lQ  1c 
y	ruNMoxo/Ry o/t:u~M}{:Fu`}1pter|{hvt:pPovz}t:v/
t:ur3{"{:1@vxm`o7y }1pP~R{:o Ft:vyz{Zr1x2 Q {:}1)M tevzm`oyz{erxQ}+r3{"{'`uy vt}uvxmrvy	ruo7y }1pP
~``vxo/t:u~}{:Ru`}1p7tZr3{Qvt:pPosQm`o	uto	u r1y	y o/zvz}rvpP}Rv   {:}1+vt:pPo/vz}ru}1r1yz{:osvxmrv
y }1xzo/y v{:ru)o	 ^  l>`o/vt:}1u  }1c1`o/vt:}1u2xo {Zrvzo/7vx}ruF7}1vzm`o	cy }1pP~R{:o	vxoQ~`x}R{o	p
 RQm`o	xo te)r5o	vc}h}1xu}xp7R{ercru tZ+r5Q}xuP}1xp7R{Zr`

	fifffi  }1p~``vt:u`
 t  7lQ  1-  mrt:uvxm`oMrt:u` n{ff{:pru`crt:Qt:uMo	x  / !)/ "Rr~`~`x}Fryxm'
 t"t  2 Q {:}1cM y }1pP~R{:o	vxot:uvxm`o $ # l x r~`~`z}Fr1yzm  vzmrv5teH+r15mr r17ruRw~`x}R{o	p
vxmrv7xo/Rt:xo/}15t:vP}{:`vt:}1uvxm`ost:uFvzo	r1y vt:1oNoN}ru}1ryz{os{:}1)vt:pPo/   t"t"t %r3
xo/R{:vt:uN}1xp7R{Zr1-vxmrvrzou`}1v}1xust:uruRP}1u`o5}2vxm`opP}`Ro {ro/r~`~`z}Fr1yzm`o/	
 (  + * /	  - ,ru  
&+3'
 &+   t  o	v   ) QormFR~o	z1r~`m')Qm`o	zo  )
(  .  /3  0 /1,Fcovy }1uvxxy 2
v ru3 t:uvxm`o}{ff{:})t:u`NQr32l)m`o7o	v}rtZrR{:o/)t"{"{Mo
 (76 .  3/  6!8 ,F9  5
 (0: .  /3  :8 ,7y }1utZv}2vxm`o}1xp7R{Zr1 :;<
 6=; }? >A@B> Qt:ur3{"{1
4 5
 ( @O.  /3  @OP J ,tZruNo/Rot:u  
y }1utZv}r|{ff{cyz{Zro/ D C 6!;FEHG /3 G C 6=;FIKJ  `Qm`o	xoM L N
QSR

fiTVUW
X!YZBYU![7\!]_^BY`W!a=ZBbcF]\d[!cea!Ufa=gih9Ua
j]SYkfilmY
nporqsVt umvxwVy{zB|e}9~D+~d}$0+}D~-dyD!0NfHf+2  z|e}~~
|~}$!}$09dy
}O|e}$D0
9x|FD
$$i!0SD3!Dd~dp |e}}O|e}$D0
p|A~d_D~d~!|F!~d
iD!01x|
~d!D~S'0pddSSDS
2'~'DD!~}D}O|F!0`DD!7~d$|e~d
FS}|F}DD~d
|yH  zx~d-5D!0D|r}B!DD!?

|F$|Fx?}$0?D~}D~d|r}S}9~-yVD
e~}
|Fx9'D!!09~d!+~~`'e~d}$|Fm}D~x9D!FH'!BS'!Fd+x!0-
S
)SSD|FN|
D0+}S+}z+9}~S_|FA0DDfd9
|eDAS~}D~d F ~d
D!0DyVDe~d}$?x|e}x}D~d$|e}OS
m!p}~d$|e}OS}xmD'~d ~dD!0y9D!$x?~dD
}O|e}$0`S
!!m`}$!dx~!_~y!$|FxD!D!

|F$|Fdy x}$0D~?  z
~dD!0yD!0D2|e}9~d'S
D~

S}x!|
D0+}S9z7S0~d}?z{|e}2~D+~d}$0+}D~V+
!
|r}2!d|F
|S}D~~B7~d|r~
S}|Fix?~d!mS~d|i0V9
|eDS~}2D~d~d
0Vp~D2|F}O|e}$D0
S
nporqsVt)vwyfi N0F0SSD  {|e}~x~
|F~}!}$0y=}D~d$|e}OyV|!D!0?zd  SSD+  
|e}~D+~d}$0+}D~dyH
$$i9}$B!Dd2D~dz|F`D0}$S+}x~-S
S}H|'{~d~dS
~F
~dD!e~d}
xdy9?i`!dD~dx2|e}?}O|e}$D0
?x|FDi 9
|eD_S~d}2D~d!0D|r}}$d
D~d9

S}9!mF! 9
|F
9|e}|xB7yVDD!?

|F$|Fdy{z~'x?}$0
D~d{F!
}9DD'z9~d'
0p}1!d!7D~dz?0~d!!DS
SD~d`i}$~0}$0S!!m`}$'D~dz<7$
|e}~D+~d}$0+}D~dy !0D  7  SD+  `x!0-yD{e~|F x}0iD~d'
0FSSDF2|e}}O|e}$D0
x|FD39
|e
D+~|r}xD!y~xD~d2|e}~
|~
 !D{e~|F}B~d?|ydFd} D~d-x{~{DS
SD!{!D
05dy
|F!D!BD~d}$0 
}D~e}dy~
`m0D+~!D!?!
F0dy|F!~~
|F~B}$!}$0+}dyB }O|e}$D0
|
9
|eS~}D~d?!!$|F!  _|e}
 1 
	ff2   ~d+_|FiD!m~dd|F fi F~  B~d+| 
 |F}$m0D'~d!!D`~-
  F  |e}D!e~}D}dyB!D
F0}}$d~d
F|FdF
!|e~{$|Fx|FD~-!|!
2qV||V+9 
~
|F!~dp0~d~}$VFx 
!S}$$|F}D~+~3x! e~}}2|e}
|F7~70
D3D!
e~}D}1dyB!D
F0}}$dF7~d
F`~dF
!|e~x$|F~
|F!D~d0~d~}$~|!S~p
!0dy
!S}$$|F}2D~
 f+~F!!~|~d~
 !D
F0
0?yV9
|r}e~}}x|e}0  |F0
B
dFS~dyVD
e~!
}  SS$"  -!!~SD?    SS$+  }DD~d?|y~d

F|

y  |e}}D~d$|e}Ofi~d
F'wO|r}S~}}$0~d|F}$DS~idy
dFS~diyVD
e~}10~d| 
|F}$+~dS}dyB~d
 
   
0?!D
F0
 !!D~d!!~dD|FD!$w #xwD ~d!!`~-
|F9|e}20!!3D+~d00yp
e~
dyBi~d D~}$D!2yFdx|F!%
 !S}$|-
& ( 'ff)*,+-!.0/`S2 13-!)416587313-9$x0 :;. *<16=>169?-*9(+=@9@/1A
 +B/C-*%D=E-+-"FG)H *-6:I705C9B=@*. *<16=>169?-*9
+=@9@/J
 +B/C-*K-*HL)? M-NF,76O1
 P
d|F~7
yVD
e~}~DR
 QD-dD!S}~DS
 !S}$|F} |F
 D~0~d~}$S2|F
0m0
0`$F





F



B

  
V|F~+~Ffi~d!0DyD!9!D
0 |e}x|F
 
  F  ~d
!S}D}0
xx|+}$x!Dd9D~~}$x0$|F! & H~d|r}
wO'+
0xD!Dd
  

   ~d+


TT

fiUVWXEY(Z\[8]<^6]<_X>`aXcb<d<XEV<e;ZfffhgX>_id<X
jlkcmn?oqp(rsut6v
wAxzy6{(|${C}N|${C~||${tSNL>tNv$>KRS?GE2S>t6v
t
?GE<!<t6(vtNLL<<t6v<t6{tN<Cv%La,S\<$t6v"RwJNcvt6Cv!vc
NCNt6vt
NrR<t<EffCGtNvG<t6t6L;aaa$t6v$>ta6L>t>
<>t6GE>t><>;A!
a
"tN<t<tN8vRaE$t4$>v!Nv">
>C>v$>t><t6CvtaL>vt6"c0ff>tG?GE>%RSEff6LtlC$BL>vaNv">
>S<<tE$t6aa8aEv<t<>t62ItE<S<t6v<t6<<tRK?GEc
vc>t<>vEC<%vGtlN>t6vttff!t6%z<$(B"
<<C$tc<<tlEJNv">><C>v$>tJE$t } |$|"2<t6
v$>tKE$t%G}||NlNt6Sv<tt6v,$E>tKy}||"<Ct%>v<Ntc2t
|,}||<|}||  %tN<t
{Sx(}%(~6(  
{x?4(@N<
4
x> c  N      ((Ga%(
 
At!<<tvvEv$E>t!LRSSLav<t6tcGN<vt6tN>t!?{(
<<C$tGv	
v x
  } ff|  ~ |fi|   ffESv$E?<%<t6Cv?GAtltN<tw (xy6{  
ax 2CtlE> vv{%E>Ncvt6Cv4>vw  !>NttC>v$>t,EtuRc
vct;v<t6tG$v!t%v>t$v4<tv<t,<ff>u2BKv<t6tN?ttA<EG%N $<Nv
w  ff<v{$vNvtvvv>t$v4<tGRv<t<  lv!tGE$tSv<tv<t6!Bw  <t
ENE$vt6CvvBt6$tGt$t6v$ELNCv"v<t!<t6Cv$>tEtaGSt<
vvBv<tvvl<t6Cvav$EtBv<t$tffw  EaNE$vt6Cv>vBt6v>va6<<vtt6Et
{Sv<t6tN?t{%Ct<vtN<,vL,>,;$<$t6v"0
ffCt6"$tN>$<<C$tvv$w  tNCE$vN6aAtltN<
t   x!L{   w  C%v<tt
L><t%Rt$><>v<t<t6>4"N<KRt<tGv
v x 
 }|ff| <v$EtGG
EN>tv<t!<v<tE>
sut6v!v"tG<A>$vNNt!aa8a!(<t6t6>$v"Nt,tl<LEw  A 
v<t!tN$>t>v<t>t6S<t64<t6 t6v;$E>t6<wKLLIt!v<t!<>2IL
w   6BKLtv<t,N $<Nv$>LR   6lff<< v$><wJv<v<t
 
! 
<<(Bt<vN> <t6 ?GE%vvLLNv">K{ L
2>KL
E4<v$E2t
<t6tN?tBt,6N<<vtSv<t,Rt6N!vLA>$v"Nt
 $$v>C><v!v<tS<<2vt





>



a




E$<vv<<>t6hE
?"
m ?LL?  sut6vwx G!
 %xz;" !v$ENt!"vv2v
w E<v
v$E>t!<t
$t6v2I<tNEwKEyC!L>tGv<tlt6va<tNE?Ey #$#<fi| #<|% #8C& L8tN>?t
<<<t0v<t$t6v<tNcl(
w 'Et )!vJy #<| #;c>>6<<vt
t6<tt6CvtC%S?GE<
EN>t6vtv<t!<I2\<t6t6+
 *<
o 0rR>taxBv<t$t6v"Nvt6$E$v$E<tNE32}542~R62<<vtN<<vt
,.-/  / 1
>>C<cIv$>t>t6v<t"Nvt6$E$v$E!8tNE62 } Sv<C$t!72 ~ 
Nrt$L;tv"LE$KvECS<<Svvv<t?L>><,<t6hEN>t6vt 
9
 8!A9
 !as ;:=<?>  @ACBDFE3 A?E!DHGJI.DK LMEONQ
} P$@KRN(
~ A?STP$AUP(
 A?SCR
 VWS5PH P$VA? < E%A < VRI.DK LME
$$$X E3 @YA < @TZ.[\Dfi @]E6 A?E^2U
} P$@KU2~SX E<ff VA <_>  La`b6Pc@YK!Pc@ < @YA?H Z9
 dbeK A?ff I < @U
 BfSC A?SC.
 A?SC$
< EgPOI.DK L < @h2.ij
x 2 } 4O2 ~ B < A?S!I.D$.
 A?STP$@!dA Ek
lWm

finCoYp5qsr$t7rcosuvsw(x7rTpsyzt7{$|}wvus|_yso~yzR=oYy5\wrc3r

39\(9\7_9fi$U5}W$sW.$5ccY}csWss$7ficUss}.Y5s$._H}U
sOWg=Yfi$fiWH_HH_.5fi_;9Ue!U}$WRsYfi$fiWH_HH_Us5fi9U.Y]
Ucs5="fi$sfiH^99fYs^	^(9\7sc5W$5ccY}U}!	QYWYH\e\W
}U5}$s=;Us5fi"]sU=sWsW}9fi$5ff}Ye}$H=UcsWsYsWhsOsWsW
}=Yfi}$s5	UU\YhU
g$fi5W&es$7	CYff5s&sssc5W7sQe5YfiH}$c\9\=e^\
RU;}$WRUcffsJ
efffe}~hsQYh5c&Y]h}5W$W	$3Y!e.
$Hc=sWsW	sW	_9HW9"CWeW=Y\s5Y	ficW9a"5$WR.5fiYsgHeWff
Yff$fiWH_HH_\Us5fi_\;Y!Q$Ca9X=s$=WcWh5$UW\
7J\Y$}
QgU5fi
YfiYY=HY]Y9s;YYe=5a}Oa7$sW	5}ff	]$$
efia$95fiz"
s 
fisY 9HY]Y\s zz =5a}Oa7$sW\5}ff	sf
$.eOJ$sC$;W$WR=WHWWOYRhcfi$F
Yffs^YQY
Y^jYjYjssYa"$sW=5}ffU$e=sH5}9sCa}9C$5_9_}!
 YC"eW=j.$Y$e;s5\fi$We"}W	eY=a6Y$5}Ua69   

Y$=U5fife}!Uc9Y!h$sX
HHX=$fihYUUOficTffYacfi$ff;Y$}s].sYfiHUhY5}H}$YOY;cH
$sOhU$shs._$QY5}H}$YWUcff5W\h$sffQ$fi$	}  Yg_HYfi}$sT;
U
YsWfiC$.h  =egsW]hff$;$fi$ff}QgY9aes5YfisY5W\5}

.5}H}5_Wc^$fi$	Y$}s!$!sYffH\	YT
cYW		cHhhHWgs;_5YW5}Y
$sefi$YHYfic&""$fic!7Ycz=jjz}eWsHW5ffs=$fi7YTssH}s
ss5}sficWgHWg5$ _gfi$W $Y a9sOHW;=$fi$fi  ss5YfigsY5W
5}He_HO.5}H}5a_WH}$j$fi$} UfeUY$U$sffsQhss5hficW	~&=sW!
Y5}H}$J fUYeYess5_}!s\ss5gfi$W $!c}fiH}$Y"sg 	s
$5$}$YX
	Ws.\ses5Y&esW$W zfCa}9$Yf}f9CYff;YYU	O 5}O
Us5fi=s5WfffiH}$=HhHWff^}sOYff$fiWH_UUs5fi_;WsHW5ffH}$&=Qs
$sWeYY5W$WUO 5}O35fi&Yfi}$s5e.s\HW7Yfi$fiWH_HH_Us5fiXYYsWfiC$
aefic5JYY!s\}TWffHfiH}$R7
eOWffe}]sUYff$fiWH_\Us5fi_\WsWTffH}$!e
e$5_hg5}g.YYs\O 5}O"5fiYfi$5Wshs\sT67esW$W s









	

ff


ff


ff


fi


$_sszff5fff&s$Ycgssc} 
5}5"!	Yca}sh6#
YfiWsH}$Y}!5C$H}$
 sHWOW$&%')Y( +*,.-/*013?2 ,9- ,546*13*879*:-<;>=@?ff-/13;ffA>-CBED:FGBHIffJK$ zI 
$
$5	ff5
I ffL$ WOTH_WgYfi$UssfiH}$Yg$HfiffUM=! $ ssffT
 }OcYW 
Hff0C; ;CN2O,QP:9
- H6R9S@%T$URVW:X8Y
\_"Qfffff5
 ff;5$H5H}$Y}TJhesW$J[	Z se}5$\e $HeW$_}$&Ufia}.}Y
eW$Re
ff0C; ; N2O,QP:9
- ]$]$^$6R9V`__Y
	TW}a fHs
b ffff5c ffd$ Yfis\_5WT3WH}$fi_H}$Ysffs$ C132 eE0ff2O*fRC,13;fgV
fh2iP;,0C;jBdk_lBHcIKm<JKcQmz
f}WT\}:aL	
n $H}$&Q.n $ffff5I ff&$T}H}$Y&}fffisfiH}sH}$hY.#s
 WY5}THR$H_
e$$5}sporq fi$U5}W$s(ut8fi; $+;132v0C*fT
% Axw@y813; 6=z02v;,0 ;<BDD<{KBTcsI  JKcG|8s 
}~

fi]OudK<OT
#<ff6z]`uu&uCffQCUr"Q Q+:E8+lE^l[Q`[<
 u@x@:9<:8<` 9ffO<6 3 vC3ffOhhff </HK<KQl.
#<ff@6K]9+uzMHCKC#Q<Q+h56&Q\ffCG  <Cl[:E&Q8<C::
 O:Q<\<[UQCu+x@Q3OQ:Ql:ff:
<&:&CffQCz89KQ9> +rffhC:+  U:&QO:+u[E+ C v8G+x@#6
 ffQlff@ffQl
9Q\:u^Q8:urd Q r"Q Q:p^ffh:+:p
xOv+ +  Mx\l.\jQC#+]6 v 8>C lHff: 
G:u6[i\Gu & :  CffQCdr&<\:Q+O<:rz:56:CG+<
  E+  Cv8G]+6 ]  ulK
r+<zKdzCQC89<+ ffO<6 3 EvC3vihff < H:+l
G< K :+u&zzCffQlQ^x@Q39M"C3+3 jOhv ff@<<:ux<  z
]:O:r&CQC 8 x@h :O 5UK v+ p h  E+zj/ff33v.]u&9O<
xQ  <C+:Effhi3QO:^8: x<
:`u& : : jKQ G&+uz] pCKCr<<C:`"ffhu\ffQ\ff
Q<<Q<QM+< <C<< M3OffCjC<v8 u33ff   ffz
6: >&z^:<z @ :uuLCQCr+Q :C <``+OMQ O<
  E+  Cv8G]+]^]U  u::
6: >QM^:9<    :u  Q r\^ffQ:+:d"Q+O<ff6:C.
6 3 vC3ffOhhff  GHz:j8
6 8 O<z&:9+uu^ p :OQ<+ u CffQCr r9    ]: rQ<9
CG C:  < ffO< E+  Cv8GrC3 3vz :xK:<v8 56Cv 8>px@h ff
v  6Q: p8  +< <+O:
z    >CQCT & h  <C^: "<C<6 3 EvC3vihff  H. @.
< :z#zCQCd" x<+<QC:+[:9  O: x59O:`< ffC  OQ:
+p 8>6<3+hO\U <<+ff 
:&`uu] >zCQ6x@Q33vdx@h :O dO+ <
8:u8&CQCux"9QO]+Q"Q\Q\l h d[  OuxE+  Cv8Gr+ Q
C3 3vT<<+C6  < rff+3vx@Q3U ff<3>C8ff8Q
 \:uu^ 6: p. CGC^:Q" "QhO:+ x Gff8\:`u
E+ffC COQ:]+]^^6  lHG:K.
 \:u^T6: >u CffQC&^:Q"QhO:+ G <^ff8\G+u
8 u+M Q  : 8.r.uff:
<<u&u Q ]x@:+8+ffE.&QO<>E+ffC COQ:p+" 8 O9<]<<+C
 9KffC 3 :<& <3>  Tff






	

ff
fi













$







!

 





#"

$%

'&

)%



(





*%



$

+%

!

,%

-%

.%



 +/

0

21











,%





3%



54

*%



!4

-6



87

:9



)%



8%



;%



$

6

 <7

.=

3fi

$

)

3 

>@?

fiAB,C$D*E!FEB*G5H*IKJEC*LMFN!OPIQHG*ORL*BSLMTVUWB,L$XYI@EZ[\E

]_^P`,acbPdee@f,gih*jlk@m!m!n$olh;pd@q!asr!`$^P`*tuqv,rw*eWxzyles^{r`}|ffac^P`*tuq~raac^Pv$bPdg.r*$dlbRax**2rq!y2h@ll
YYffY2s!Q)n!nQm!Mh
]_^P`,acbPdee@f,gih)jkQm!m!$o**!!<!l!\z!$@qv*^R$t!d|`$^{dac^Pe8~+d@aah

@

fi