Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 44 (2012) 709-755

Submitted 04/12; published 08/12

Online Speedup Learning for Optimal Planning
Carmel Domshlak
Erez Karpas

DCARMEL @ IE . TECHNION . AC . IL
KARPASE @ TECHNION . AC . IL

Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Management
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, 32000, Israel

Shaul Markovitch

SHAULM @ CS . TECHNION . AC . IL

Faculty of Computer Science
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, 32000, Israel

Abstract
Domain-independent planning is one of the foundational areas in the field of Artificial Intelligence. A description of a planning task consists of an initial world state, a goal, and a set of actions
for modifying the world state. The objective is to find a sequence of actions, that is, a plan, that
transforms the initial world state into a goal state. In optimal planning, we are interested in finding not just a plan, but one of the cheapest plans. A prominent approach to optimal planning these
days is heuristic state-space search, guided by admissible heuristic functions. Numerous admissible
heuristics have been developed, each with its own strengths and weaknesses, and it is well known
that there is no single best heuristic for optimal planning in general. Thus, which heuristic to
choose for a given planning task is a difficult question. This difficulty can be avoided by combining
several heuristics, but that requires computing numerous heuristic estimates at each state, and the
tradeoff between the time spent doing so and the time saved by the combined advantages of the
different heuristics might be high. We present a novel method that reduces the cost of combining admissible heuristics for optimal planning, while maintaining its benefits. Using an idealized
search space model, we formulate a decision rule for choosing the best heuristic to compute at each
state. We then present an active online learning approach for learning a classifier with that decision
rule as the target concept, and employ the learned classifier to decide which heuristic to compute at
each state. We evaluate this technique empirically, and show that it substantially outperforms the
standard method for combining several heuristics via their pointwise maximum.

1. Introduction
At the center of the problem of intelligent autonomous behavior is the task of selecting the actions
to take next. Planning in AI is best conceived as the model-based approach to automated action
selection (Geffner, 2010). The models represent the current situation, goals, and possible actions.
Planning-specific languages are used to describe such models concisely. The main challenge in
planning is computational, as most planning languages lead to intractable problems in the worst
case. However, using rigorous search-guidance tools often allows for efficient solving of interesting
problem instances.
In classical planning, which is concerned with the synthesis of plans constituting goal-achieving
sequences of deterministic actions, significant algorithmic progress has been achieved in the last
two decades. In turn, this progress in classical planning is translated to advances in more involved
planning languages, allowing for uncertainty and feedback (Yoon, Fern, & Givan, 2007; Palacios
c
2012
AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

& Geffner, 2009; Keyder & Geffner, 2009; Brafman & Shani, 2012). In optimal planning, the
objective is not just to find any plan, but to find one of the cheapest plans.
A prominent approach to domain-independent planning, and to optimal planning in particular,
is state-space heuristic search. It is very natural to view a planning task as a search problem, and
use a heuristic search algorithm to solve it. Recent advances in automatic construction of heuristics
for domain-independent planning established many heuristics to choose from, each with its own
strengths and weaknesses. However, this wealth of heuristics leads to a new question: given a
specific planning task, which heuristic to choose?
In this paper, we propose selective max  an online learning approach that combines the
strengths of several heuristic functions, leading to a speedup in optimal heuristic-search planning.
At a high level, selective max can be seen as a hyper-heuristic (Burke, Kendall, Newall, Hart, Ross,
& Schulenburg, 2003)  a heuristic for choosing among other heuristics. It is based on the seemingly trivial observation that, for each state, there is one heuristic which is the best for that state.
In principle, it is possible to compute several heuristics for each state, and then choose one according to the values they provide. However, heuristic computation in domain-independent planning is
typically expensive, and thus computing several heuristic estimates for each state takes a long time.
Selective max works by predicting for each state which heuristic will yield the best heuristic
estimate, and computes only that heuristic.
As it is not always clear how to decide what the best heuristic for each state is, we first
analyze an idealized model of a search space and describe how to choose there the best heuristic for
each state in order to minimize the overall search time. We then describe an online active learning
procedure that uses a decision rule formulated for the idealized model. This procedure constitutes
the essence of selective max.
Our experimental evaluation, which we conducted using three state-of-the-art heuristics for
domain-independent planning, shows that selective max is very effective in combining several
heuristics in optimal search. Furthermore, the results show that using selective max results in a
speedup over the baseline heuristic combination method, and that selective max is robust to different parameter settings. These claims are further supported by selective max having been a runnerup ex-aequo in the last International Planning Competition, IPC-2011 (Garca-Olaya, Jimenez, &
Linares Lopez, 2011).
This paper expands on the conference version (Domshlak, Karpas, & Markovitch, 2010) in
several ways. First, we improve and expand the presentation of the selective max decision rule.
Second, we explain how to handle non-uniform action costs in a principled way. Third, the empirical
evaluation is greatly extended, and now includes the results from IPC-2011, as well as controlled
experiments with three different heuristics, and an exploration of how the parameters of selective
max affect its performance.

2. Previous Work
Selective max is a speedup learning system. In general, speedup learning is concerned with improving the performance of a problem solving system with experience. The computational difficulty of
domain-independent planning has led many researchers to use speedup learning techniques in order
to improve the performance of planning systems; for a survey of many of these, see the work of
Minton (1994), Zimmerman and Kambhampati (2003), and Fern, Khardon, and Tadepalli (2011).
710

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

Speedup learning systems can be divided along several dimensions (Zimmerman & Kambhampati, 2003; Fern, 2010). Arguably the most important dimension is the phase in which learning takes
place. An offline, or inter-problem, speedup learner analyzes the problem solvers performance on
different problem instances in an attempt to formulate some rule which would not only improve this
performance but would also generalize well to future problem instances. Offline learning has been
applied extensively to domain-independent planning, with varying degrees of success (Fern et al.,
2011). However, one major drawback of offline learning is the need for training examples  in our
case, planning tasks from the domains of interest.
Learning can also take place online, during problem solving. An online, or intra-problem,
speedup learner is invoked by the problem solver on a concrete problem instance the solver is
working on, and it attempts to learn online, with the objective of improving the solvers performance
on that specific problem instance being solved. In general, online learners are not assumed to be pretrained on some other, previously seen problem instances; all the information they can rely on has to
be collected during the process of solving the concrete problem instance they were called for. Online
learning has been shown to be extremely helpful in propositional satisfiability (SAT) and general
constraint satisfaction (CSP) solving, where nogood learning and clause learning are now among
the essential components of any state-of-the-art solver (Schiex & Verfaillie, 1993; Marques-Silva
& Sakallah, 1996; Bayardo Jr. & Schrag, 1997). Thus, indirectly, SAT- and CSP-based domainindependent planners already benefit from these online learning techniques (Kautz & Selman, 1992;
Rintanen, Heljanko, & Niemela, 2006). However, to the best of our knowledge, our work is the first
application of online learning to optimal heuristic-search planning.

3. Background
A domain-independent planning task (or planning task, for short) consists of a description of an
initial state, a goal, and a set of available operators. Several formalisms for describing planning tasks
are in use, including STRIPS (Fikes & Nilsson, 1971), ADL (Pednault, 1989), and SAS+ (Backstrom
& Klein, 1991; Backstrom & Nebel, 1995). We describe the SAS+ formalism, the one used by
the Fast Downward planner (Helmert, 2006), on top of which we have implemented and evaluated
selective max. Nothing, however, precludes using selective max in the context of other formalisms.
A SAS+ planning task is given by a 4-tuple  = hV, A, s0 , Gi. V = {v1 , . . . , vn } is a set of state
variables, each associated with a finite domain dom(vi ). A complete assignment s to V is called a
state. s0 is a specified state called the initial state, and the goal G is a partial assignment to V . A is
a finite set of actions. Each action a is given by a pair hpre(a), eff(a)i of partial assignments to V
called preconditions and effects, respectively. Each action a also has an associated cost C(a)  R0+ .
An action a is applicable in a state s iff s |= pre(a). Applying a changes the value of each state
variable v to eff(a)[v] if eff(a)[v] is specified. The resulting state is denoted by sJaK. We denote
the state obtained from sequential application of the (respectively applicable) actions a1 , . . . , ak
starting at state s by sJha1 , . . . , ak iK. Such an action sequence is a plan if s0 Jha1 , . . . , ak iK |= G.
In optimal planning, we are interested in finding one of
Pthe cheapest plans, where the cost of a plan
ha1 , . . . , ak i is the sum of its constituent action costs ki=1 C(ai ).
A SAS+ planning task  = hV, A, s0 , Gi can be easily seen as a state-space search problem
whose states are simply complete assignments to the variables V , with transitions uniquely determined by the actions A. The initial and goal states are also defined by the initial state and goal of .
An optimal solution for a state-space search problem can be found by using the A search algorithm
711

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

with an admissible heuristic h. A heuristic evaluation function h assigns an estimate of the distance
to the closest goal state from each state it evaluates. The length of a cheapest path from state s to the
goal is denoted by h (s), and h is called admissible if it never overestimates the true goal distance
 that is, if h(s)  h (s) for any state s. A works by expanding states in the order of increasing
f (s) := g(s) + h(s), where g(s) is the cost of the cheapest path from the initial state to s known so
far.

4. Selective Max as a Decision Rule
Many admissible heuristics have been proposed for domain-independent planning; these vary from
cheap to compute yet not very accurate, to more accurate yet expensive to compute. In general,
the more accurate a heuristic is, the fewer states would be expanded by A when using it. As the
accuracy of heuristic functions varies for different planning tasks, and even for different states of
the same task, we may be able to produce a more robust optimal planner by combining several admissible heuristics. Presumably, each heuristic is more accurate, that is, provides higher estimates,
in different regions of the search space. The simplest and best-known way for doing that is using the point-wise maximum of the heuristics in use at each state. Given n admissible heuristics,
h1 , . . . , hn , a new heuristic, maxh , is defined by maxh (s) := max1in hi (s). It is easy to see that
maxh (s)  hi (s) for any state s and for any heuristic hi . Thus A search using maxh is expected to
expand fewer states than A using any individual heuristic.PHowever, if we denote the time needed
to compute hi by ti , the time needed to compute maxh is ni=1 ti .
As mentioned previously, selective max is a form of hyper-heuristic (Burke et al., 2003) that
chooses which heuristic to compute at each state. We can view selective max as a decision rule dr,
which is given a set of heuristics h1 , . . . , hn and a state s, and chooses which heuristic to compute
for that state. One natural candidate for such a decision rule is the heuristic which yields the highest,
that is, most accurate, estimate:
drmax ({h1 , . . . , hn }, s) := hargmax1in hi (s) .
Using this decision rule yields a heuristic which is as accurate as maxh , while still computing only
one heuristic per state  in time targmax1in hi (s) .
This analysis, however, does not take into account the different computation times of the different heuristics. For instance, let h1 and h2 be a pair of admissible heuristics such that h2  h1 .
A priori, it seems that using h2 should always be preferred to using h1 because the former should
cause A to expand fewer states. However, suppose that on a given planning task, A expands 1000
states when guided by h1 and only 100 states when guided by h2 . If computing h1 for each state
takes 10 ms, and computing h2 for each state takes 1000 ms, then switching from h1 to h2 increases
the overall search time. Using maxh over h1 and h2 only makes things worse, because h2  h1 ,
and thus computing the maximum simply wastes the time spent on computing h1 . It is possible,
however, that computing h2 for a few carefully chosen states, and computing h1 for all other states,
would result in expanding 100 states, while reducing the overall search time when compared to
running A with only h2 .
As this example shows, even given knowledge of the heuristics estimates in advance, it is not
clear what heuristic should be computed at each state when our objective is to minimize the overall
search time. Therefore, we begin by formulating a decision rule for choosing between one of two
heuristics, with respect to an idealized state-space model. Selective max then operates as an online
712

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

s0

s
f2 = c

f1 = c
sg

Figure 1: An illustration of the idealized search space model and the f -contours of two admissible
heuristics

active learning procedure, attempting to predict the outcome of that decision rule and choose which
heuristic to compute at each state.
4.1 Decision Rule with Perfect Knowledge
We now formulate a decision rule for choosing which of two given admissible heuristics, h1 and h2 ,
to compute for each state in an idealized search space model. In order to formulate such a decision
rule, we make the following assumptions:
 The search space is a tree with a single goal, constant branching factor b, and uniform cost
actions. Such an idealized search space model was used in the past to analyze the behavior of
A (Pearl, 1984).
 The time ti required for computing heuristic hi is independent of the state being evaluated;
w.l.o.g. we assume t2  t1 .
 The heuristics are consistent. A heuristic h is said to be consistent if it obeys the triangle
inequality: For any two states s, s0 , h(s)  h(s0 ) + k(s, s0 ), where k(s, s0 ) is the optimal cost
of reaching s0 from s.
 We have: (i) perfect knowledge about the structure of the search tree, and in particular the
cost of the optimal solution c , (ii) perfect knowledge about the heuristic estimates for each
state, and (iii) a perfect tie-breaking mechanism.
Obviously, none of the above assumptions holds in typical search problems, and later we examine
their individual influence on our framework.
Adopting the standard notation, let g(s) be the cost of the cheapest path from s0 to s. Defining
maxh (s) = max(h1 (s), h2 (s)), we then use the notation f1 (s) = g(s) + h1 (s), f2 (s) = g(s) +
h2 (s), and maxf (s) = g(s) + maxh (s). The A algorithm with a consistent heuristic h expands
states in increasing order of f = g + h (Pearl, 1984). In particular, every state s with f (s) <
h (I) = c will surely be expanded by A , and every state with f (s) > c will surely not be
713

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

expanded by A . The states with f (s) = c might or might not be expanded by A , depending on
the tie-breaking rule being used. Under our perfect tie-breaking assumption, the only states with
f (s) = c that will be expanded are those that lie along some optimal plan.
Let us consider the states satisfying f1 (s) = c (the dotted line in Fig. 1) and those satisfying
f2 (s) = c (the solid line in Fig. 1). The states above the f1 = c and f2 = c contours are those
that are surely expanded by A with h1 and h2 , respectively. The states above both these contours
(the grid-marked region in Fig. 1), that is, the states SE = {s | maxf (s) < c }, are those that are
surely expanded by A using maxh (Pearl, 1984, Thm. 4, p. 79).
Under the objective of minimizing the search time, note that the optimal decision for any state
s  SE is not to compute any heuristic at all, since all these states are surely expanded anyway.
Assuming that we still must choose one of the heuristics, we would choose to compute the cheaper
heuristic h1 . Another easy case is when f1 (s)  c . In these states, computing h1 (s) suffices to
ensure that s is not surely expanded, and using a perfect tie-breaking rule, s will not be expanded
unless it must be. Because h1 is also cheaper to compute than h2 , h1 should be preferred, regardless
of the heuristic estimate of h2 for state s.
Let us now consider the optimal decision for all other states, that is, those with f1 (s) < c and
f2 (s)  c . In fact, it is enough to consider only the shallowest such states; in Figure 1, these are the
states on the part of the f2 = c contour that separates between the grid-marked and line-marked
areas. Since f1 (s) and f2 (s) are based on the same g(s), we have h2 (s) > h1 (s), that is, h2 is
more accurate in state s than h1 . If we were interested solely in reducing state expansions, then h2
would obviously be the right heuristic to compute at s. However, for our objective of reducing the
actual search time, h2 may actually be the wrong choice because it might be much more expensive
to compute than h1 .
Let us consider the effects of each of our two alternatives. If we compute h2 (s), then s is
not surely expanded, because f2 (s) = c , and thus whether or not A expands s depends on tiebreaking. As before, we are assuming perfect tie-breaking, and thus s will not be expanded unless
it must be. Computing h2 would cost us t2 time.
In contrast, if we compute h1 (s), then s is surely expanded because f1 (s) < c . Note that not
computing h2 for s and then computing h2 for one of the descendants s0 of s is clearly a sub-optimal
strategy as we do pay the cost of computing h2 , yet the pruning of A is limited only to the search
sub-tree rooted in s0 . Therefore, our choices are really either computing h2 for s, or computing h1
for all the states in the sub-tree rooted in s that lie on the f1 = c contour. Suppose we need to
expand l complete levels of the state space from s to reach the f1 = c contour. Thus, we need to
generate an order of bl states, and then invest bl t1 time in calculating h1 for all these states that lie
on the f1 = c contour.
Considering these two options, the optimal decision in state s is thus to compute h2 iff t2 < bl t1 ,
or to express it differently, if l > logb ( tt12 ). As a special case, if both heuristics take the same time to
compute, this decision rule reduces to l > 0, that is, the optimal choice is simply the more accurate
heuristic for state s.
Putting all of the above cases together yields the decision rule dropt , as below, with ls being the
depth to go from s until f1 (s) = c :
714

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING



h1 , f1 (s) < c , f2 (s) < c



h , f (s)  c
1
1
.
dropt ({h1 , h2 }, s) :=

h1 , f1 (s) < c , f2 (s)  c , ls  logb ( tt12 )



h , f (s) < c , f (s)  c , l > log ( t2 )
2
1
2
s
b t1
4.2 Decision Rule without Perfect Knowledge
The idealized model above makes several assumptions, some of which appear to be very problematic
to meet in practice. Here we examine these assumptions more closely, and when needed, suggest
pragmatic compromises.
First, the model assumes that the search space forms a tree with a single goal state, that the
heuristics in question are consistent, and that we have a perfect tie-breaking rule. Although the
first assumption does not hold in most planning tasks, the second assumption is not satisfied by
many state-of-the-art heuristics (Karpas & Domshlak, 2009; Helmert & Domshlak, 2009; Bonet
& Helmert, 2010), and the third assumption is not realistic, they do not prevent us from using the
decision rule suggested by the model.
The idealized model also assumes that both the branching factor and the heuristic computation
times are constant across the search states. In our application of the decision rule to planning
in practice, we deal with this assumption by adopting the average branching factor and heuristic
computation times, estimated from a random sample of search states.
Finally, the decision rule dropt above requires unrealistic knowledge of both heuristic estimates,
as well as of the optimal plan cost c and the depth ls to go from state until f1 (s) = c . As we
obviously do not have this knowledge in practice, we must use some approximation of the decision
rule.
The first approximation we make is to ignore the trivial cases that require knowledge of c ;
these are the cases where either s is surely expanded, or h1 is enough to prune s. Instead, we apply
the reasoning for the complicated case for all states, resulting in the following decision rule:
(
h1 , ls  logb ( tt12 )
drapp1 ({h1 , h2 }, s) :=
.
h2 , ls > logb ( tt21 )
The next step is to somehow estimate the depth to go ls  the number of layers we need to
expand in the tree until f1 reaches c . In order to derive a useful decision rule, we assume that ls
has a positive correlation with h (s) = h2 (s)  h1 (s); that is, if h1 and h2 are close, then ls is low,
and if h1 yields a much lower estimate than h2 , implying that h1 is not very accurate for s, then the
depth to go until f1 (s) = c is large. Our approximation uses the simplest such correlation  a
linear one  between h (s) and ls , with a hyper-parameter  for controlling the slope.
Recall that in our idealized model, all actions were unit cost, and thus cost-to-go and depthto-go are the same. However, some planning tasks, and notably, all planning tasks from the 2008
International Planning Competition, feature non-uniform action costs. Therefore, our decision rule
converts heuristic estimates of cost-to-go into heuristic estimates of depth-to-go by dividing the
cost-to-go estimate by the average action cost. We do this by modifying our estimate of the depthto-go, ls , with the average action cost, which we denote by c. Plugging all of the above into our
715

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

decision rule yields:
(
h1 ,
drapp2 ({h1 , h2 }, s) :=
h2 ,

h (s)    c  logb ( tt12 )
.
h (s) >   c  logb ( tt21 )

Given b, t1 , t2 , and c, the quantity   c  logb (t2 /t1 ) becomes fixed, and in what follows we denote
it simply by threshold  .
Note that linear correlation between h (s) and ls occurs in some simple cases. The first such
case is when the h1 value remains constant in the subtree rooted at s, that is, the additive error of
h1 increases by 1 for each level below s. In this case, f1 increases by 1 for each expanded level of
the sub-tree (because h1 remains the same, and g increases by 1), and it will take expanding exactly
h (s) = h2 (s)  h1 (s) levels to reach the f1 = c contour. The second such case is when the
absolute error of h1 remains constant, that is, h1 increases by 1 for each level expanded, and so f1
increases by 2. In this case, we will need to expand h (s)/2 levels. This can be generalized to the
case where the estimate h1 increases by any constant additive factor c, which results in h (s)/(c+1)
levels being expanded.
Furthermore, there is some empirical evidence to support our conclusion about exponential
growth of the search effort as a function of heuristic error, even when the assumptions made by the
model do not hold. In particular, the experiments of Helmert and Roger (2008) on IPC benchmarks
with heuristics with small constant additive errors show that the number of expanded nodes most
typically grows exponentially as the (still very small and additive) error increases.
Finally, we remark that because our decision rule always chooses an admissible heuristic, the
resulting heuristic estimate will always be admissible. Thus, even if the chosen heuristic is not the
correct one according to dropt , this will not result in loss of optimality of the solution, but only in
a possible increase in search time.

5. Online Learning of the Decision Rule
While decision rule drapp2 still requires knowledge of h1 and h2 , we can now use it as a binary
label for each state. We can compute the value of the decision rule by paying the computation
time of both heuristics, t1 + t2 , and, more importantly, we can use a binary classifier to predict the
value of this decision rule for some unknown state. Note that we use the classifier online, during the
problem solving process, and the time spent on learning and classification is counted as time spent
on problem solving. Furthermore, as in active learning, we can choose to pay for a label for some
state, where the payment is also in computation time. Therefore we refer to our setting as active
online learning.
In what follows, we provide a general overview of the selective max procedure, and describe
several alternatives for each of its components. Our decision rule states that the more expensive
heuristic h2 should be computed at a search state s when h2 (s)  h1 (s) >  . This decision rule
serves as a binary target concept, which corresponds to the set of states where the more expensive
heuristic h2 is significantly more accurate than the cheaper heuristic h1  the states where, according to our model, the reduction in expanded states by computing h2 outweighs the extra time
needed to compute it. Selective max then uses a binary classifier to predict the value of the decision
rule. There are several steps to building the classifier:
716

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

evaluate(s)
hh, conf idencei := CLASSIFY(s, model)
if (conf idence > ) then
return h(s)
else
label := h1
if h2 (s)  h1 (s) >   c  logb (t2 /t1 ) then label := h2
update model with hs, labeli
return max(h1 (s), h2 (s))
Figure 2: The selective max state evaluation procedure
1. Training Example Collection: We first need to collect training examples, which should be
representative of the entire search space. Several state-space sampling methods are discussed
in Section 5.1.
2. Labeling Training Examples: After the training examples are collected, they are first used to
estimate the average branching factor b, average heuristic computation times t1 and t2 , and
the average action cost c. Once b, t1 , t2 , and c are estimated, we use them to estimate the
threshold  =   c  logb (t2 /t1 ) for the decision rule.
We then generate a label for each training example by calculating h (s) = h2 (s)  h1 (s),
and comparing it to the decision threshold: If h (s) >  , we label s with h2 , otherwise with
h1 . If t1 > t2 we simply switch between the heuristics  our decision is always whether or
not to compute the more expensive heuristic; the default is to compute the cheaper heuristic,
unless the classifier says otherwise.
3. Feature Extraction: Having obtained a set of training examples, we must decide about the
features to characterize each example. Since our target concept is based on heuristic values,
the features should represent the information that heuristics are derived from  typically the
problem description and the current state.
While several feature-construction techniques for characterizing states of planning tasks have
been proposed in previous literature (Yoon, Fern, & Givan, 2008; de la Rosa, Jimenez, &
Borrajo, 2008), they were all designed for inter-problem learning, that is, for learning from
different planning tasks which have already been solved offline. However, in our approach,
we are only concerned with one problem, in an online setting, and thus these techniques are
not applicable. In our implementation, we use the simplest features possible, taking each
state variable as a feature. As our empirical evaluation demonstrates, even these elementary
features suffice for selective max to perform well.
4. Learning: Once we have a set of labeled training examples, each represented by a vector of
features, we can train a binary classifier. Several different choices of classifier are discussed
in Section 5.2.
After completing the steps described above, we have a binary classifier that can be used to
predict the value of our decision rule. However, as the classifier is not likely to have perfect accuracy,
717

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

we further consult the confidence the classifier associates with its classification. The resulting state
evaluation procedure of selective max is depicted in Figure 2. For every state s evaluated by the
search algorithm, we use our classifier to decide which heuristic to compute. If the classification
confidence exceeds a confidence threshold , a parameter of selective max, then only the indicated
heuristic is computed for s. Otherwise, we conclude that there is not enough information to make
a selective decision for s, and compute the regular maximum over h1 (s) and h2 (s). However, we
use this opportunity to improve the quality of our prediction for states similar to s, and update our
classifier by generating a label based on h2 (s)h1 (s) and learning from the newly labeled example.
These decisions to dedicate computation time to obtain a label for a new example constitute the
active part of our learning procedure. It is also possible to update the estimates for b, t1 , t2 , and c,
and change the threshold  accordingly. However, this would result in the concept we are trying
to learn constantly changing  a phenomenon known as concept drift  which usually affects
learning adversely. Therefore, we do not update the threshold  .
5.1 State-Space Sampling
The initial state-space sample serves two purposes. First, it is used to estimate the branching factor
b, the heuristic computation times t1 and t2 , the average action cost c, and then to compute the
threshold  =   c  logb (t2 /t1 ), which is used to specify our concept. After the concept is specified,
the state-space sample also provides us with a set of examples on which the classifier is initially
trained. Therefore, it is important to have an initial state-space sample that is representative of the
states which will be evaluated during search. The number of states in the initial sample is controlled
by a parameter N .
One option is to use the first N states of the search. However, this method is biased towards
states closer to the initial state, and therefore is not likely to represent the search space well. Thus,
we discuss three more sophisticated state-space sampling procedures, all of which are based on
performing random walks, or probes, from the initial state. While the details of these sampling
procedures vary, each such probe terminates at some pre-set depth limit.
The first sampling procedure, which we refer to as biased probes, uses an inverse heuristic
selection bias for choosing the next state to go to in the probe. Specifically, the probability of
choosing state s as the successor from which the random walk will continue is proportional to
1/ maxh (s). This biases the sample towards states with lower heuristic estimates, which are more
likely to be expanded during the search.
The second sampling procedure is similar to the first one, except that it chooses the successor
uniformly, and thus we refer to it as unbiased probes. Both these sampling procedures add all
of the generated states (that is, the states along the probe as well as their siblings) to the statespace sample, and they both terminate after collecting N training examples. The depth limit for all
random walks is the same in both sampling schemes, and is set to some estimate of the goal depth;
we discuss this goal depth estimate later.
The third state-space sampling procedure, referred to here as PDB sampling, has been proposed
by Haslum, Botea, Helmert, Bonet, and Koenig (2007). This procedure also uses unbiased probes,
but only adds the last state reached in each probe to the state-space sample. The depth of each
probe is determined individually, by drawing a random depth from a binomial distribution around
the estimated goal depth.
718

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

Note that all three sampling procedures rely on some estimate of the minimum goal depth.
When all actions are unit cost, the minimum goal depth is the same as h (s0 ), and thus we can use
a heuristic to estimate it. In our evaluation, we used twice the heuristic estimate of the initial state,
2  maxh (s0 ), as the goal depth estimate. However, with non-uniform action costs, goal depth and
cost are no longer measured in the same units. While it seems we could divide the above heuristicbased estimate by the average action cost c, recall that we use the state-space sample in order to
obtain an estimate for estimate c, thus creating a circular dependency. Although it is possible to
estimate c by taking the average cost of all actions in the problem description, there is no reason
to assume that all actions are equally likely to be used. Another option is to modify the above
state-space sampling procedures, and place a cost limit, rather than a depth limit, on each probe.
However, this would pose a problem in the presence of 0-cost actions. In such a case, when a probe
reaches its cost limit yet has a possible 0-cost action to apply, it is not clear whether the probe
should terminate. Therefore, we keep using depth-limited probes and attempt to estimate the depth
of the cheapest goal. We compute a heuristic estimate for the initial state, and then use the number
of actions which the heuristic estimate is based on as our goal depth estimate. While this is not
possible with every heuristic, we use in our empirical evaluation the monotonically-relaxed plan
heuristic. This heuristic, also known as the FF heuristic (Hoffmann & Nebel, 2001), does provide
such information: we first use this heuristic to find a relaxed plan from the initial state, and then use
the number of actions in the relaxed plan as our goal depth estimate.
5.2 Classifier
The last decision to be made is the choice of classifier. Although many classifiers can be used here,
several requirements must be met due to our particular setup. First, both training and classification must be very fast, as both are performed during time-constrained problem solving. Second,
the classifier must be incremental to support active learning. This is achieved by allowing online
updates of the learned model. Finally, the classifier should provide us with a meaningful measure
of confidence for its predictions.
While several classifiers meet these requirements, we found the Naive Bayes classifier to provide
a good balance between speed and accuracy. One note on the Naive Bayes classifier is that it
assumes a very strong conditional independence between the features. Although this is not a fully
realistic assumption for planning tasks, using a SAS+ task formulation in contrast to the classical
STRIPS formulations helps a lot: instead of many highly dependent binary variables, we have a
much smaller set of less dependent ones.
Although, as the empirical evaluation will demonstrate, Naive Bayes appears to be the most
suitable classifier to use with selective max, other classifiers can also be used. The most obvious
choice for a replacement classifier would be a different Bayesian classifier. One such classifier is
AODE (Webb, Boughton, & Wang, 2005), an extension of Naive Bayes, which somewhat relaxes
the assumption of independence between the features, and is typically more accurate than Naive
Bayes. However, this added accuracy comes at the cost of increased training and classification time.
Decision trees are another popular type of classifier that allows for even faster classification.
While most decision tree induction algorithms are not incremental, the Incremental Tree Inducer
(ITI) algorithm (Utgoff, Berkman, & Clouse, 1997) supports incremental updating of decision trees
by tree restructuring, and also has a freely available implementation in C. In our evaluation, we used
ITI in incremental mode, and incorporated every example into the tree immediately, because the
719

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

tree is likely to be used for many classifications between pairs of consecutive updates with training
examples from active learning. The classification confidence with the ITI classifier is obtained by
the frequency of examples at the leaf node from which the classification came.
A different family of possible classifiers is k-Nearest Neighbors (kNN) (Cover & Hart, 1967).
In order to use kNN, we need a distance metric between examples, which, with our features, are
simply states. As with our choice of features, we opt for simplicity and use Euclidean distance
as our metric. kNN enjoys very fast learning time but suffers from slow classification time. The
classification confidence is obtained by a simple (unweighted) vote between the k nearest neighbors.
Another question related to the choice of classifier is feature selection. In some planning tasks,
the number of variables, and accordingly, features, can be over 2000 (for example, task 35 of the
AIRPORT domain has 2558 variables). While the performance of Naive Bayes and kNN can likely be
improved using feature selection, doing so poses a problem when the initial sample is considered.
Since feature selection will have to be done right after the initial sample is obtained, it will have to
be based only on the initial sample. This could cause a problem since some features might appear to
be irrelevant according to the initial sample, yet turn out to be very relevant when active learning is
used after some low-confidence states are encountered. Therefore, we do not use feature selection
in our empirical evaluation of selective max.
5.3 Extension to Multiple Heuristics
To this point, we have discussed how to choose which heuristic to compute for each state when
there are only two heuristics to choose from. When given more than two heuristics, the decision
rule presented in Section 4 is inapplicable, and extending it to handle more than two heuristics is
not straightforward. However, extending selective max to use more than two heuristics is straightforward  simply compare heuristics in a pair-wise manner, and use a voting rule to choose which
heuristic to compute.
While there are many possible such voting rules, we go with the simplest one, which compares
every pair of heuristics, and chooses the winner by a vote, weighted by the confidence for each pairwise decision. The overall winner is simply the heuristic which has the highest total confidence from
all pairwise comparisons, with ties broken in favor of the cheaper-to-compute heuristic. Although
this requires a quadratic number of classifiers, training and classification time (at least with Naive
Bayes) appear to be much lower than the overall time spent on heuristic computations, and thus
the overhead induced by learning and classification is likely to remain relatively low for reasonable
heuristic ensembles.

6. Experimental Evaluation
To evaluate selective max empirically, we implemented it on top of the open-source Fast Downward
planner (Helmert, 2006). Our empirical evaluation is divided into three parts. First, we examine the performance of selective max using the last International Planning Competition, IPC-2011,
as our benchmark. Selective max was the runner-up ex-aequo at IPC-2011, tying for 2nd place
with a version of Fast Downward using an abstraction merge-and-shrink heuristic (Nissim, Hoffmann, & Helmert, 2011), and losing to a sequential portfolio combining the heuristics used in both
runners-up (Helmert, Roger, & Karpas, 2011). Second, we present a series of controlled parametric
experiments, where we examine the behavior of selective max under different settings. Finally, we
720

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

Parameter


N
Sampling method
Classifier

Default value
1
0.6
1000
Biased probes
Naive Bayes

Meaning
heuristic difference bias
confidence threshold
initial sample size
state-space sampling method
classifier type

Table 1: Parameters for the selmax entry in IPC-2011.
compare selective max to a simulated sequential portfolio, using the same heuristics as selective
max.
6.1 Performance Evaluation: Results from IPC-2011
The IPC-2011 experiments (Garca-Olaya et al., 2011) were run by the IPC organizers, on their
own machines, with a time limit of 30 minutes and a memory limit of 6 GB per planning task.
The competition included some new domains, which none of the participants had seen before, thus
precluding the participants from using offline learning approaches.
Although many planners participated in the sequential optimal track of IPC-2011, we report here
only the results relevant to selective max. The selective max entry in IPC-2011 was called selmax,
and consisted of selective max over the uniform action cost partitioning version of hLA (Karpas &
Domshlak, 2009) and hLM-CUT (Helmert & Domshlak, 2009) heuristics. The parameters used for
selective max in IPC-2011 are reported in Table 1. Additionally, each of the heuristics selmax used
was entered individually as BJOLP (hLA ) and lmcut (hLM-CUT ), and we report results for all three
planners. While a comparison of selective max with the regular maximum of hLA and hLM-CUT
would be interesting, there was no such entry at IPC-2011, and thus we can not report on it. In our
controlled experiments, we do compare selective max to the regular maximum, as well as to other
baseline combination methods.
Figure 3 shows the anytime profile of these three planners on IPC-2011 tasks, plotting the number of tasks solved under different timeouts, up to the time limit of 30 minutes. Additionally, Table
2 shows the number of tasks solved in each domain of IPC-2011, after 30 minutes, and includes the
number of problems solved by the winner, Fast Downward Stone Soup 1 (FDSS-1), for reference.
As these results show, selective max solves more problems than each of the individual heuristics
it uses. Furthermore, the anytime profile of selective max dominates each of these heuristics, in the
range between 214 seconds until the full 30 minute timeout. The behavior of the anytime plot with
shorter timeouts is due to the overhead of selective max, which consists of obtaining the initial statespace sample, as well as learning and classification. However, it appears that selective max quickly
compensates for its relatively slow start.
6.2 Controlled Experiments
In our series of controlled experiments, we attempted to evaluate the impact of different parameters
on selective max. We controlled the following independent variables:
 Heuristics: We used three state-of-the-art admissible heuristics: hLA (Karpas & Domshlak,
2009), hLM-CUT (Helmert & Domshlak, 2009), and hLM-CUT+ (Bonet & Helmert, 2010). None
721

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

160

Solved Instances

140

120

100

80

BJOLP
lmcut
selmax

60
0

200

400

600

800
1000
Timeout (seconds)

1200

1400

1600

1800

Figure 3: IPC-2011 anytime performance. Each line shows the number of problems from IPC-2011
solved by the BJOLP, lmcut, and selmax planners, respectively, under different timeouts.
Domain
barman
elevators
floortile
nomystery
openstacks
parcprinter
parking
pegsol
scanalyzer
sokoban
tidybot
transport
visitall
woodworking
TOTAL

BJOLP
4
14
2
20
14
11
3
17
6
20
14
7
10
9
151

lmcut
4
18
7
15
16
13
2
18
12
20
14
6
10
12
167

selmax
4
18
7
20
14
13
4
17
10
20
14
6
10
12
169

FDSS-1
4
18
7
20
16
14
7
19
14
20
14
7
13
12
185

Table 2: Number of planning tasks solved at IPC 2011 in each domain by the BJOLP, lmcut, and
selmax planners. The best result from these 3 planners is in bold. The number of problems
solved by Fast Downward Stone Soup 1 (FDSS-1) in each domain is also included for
reference.

722

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

of these base heuristics yields better search performance than the others across all planning
domains. Of these heuristics, hLA is typically the fastest to compute and the least accurate,
hLM-CUT is more expensive to compute and more accurate, and hLM-CUT+ is the most expensive to compute and the most accurate.1 From the data we have gathered in these experiments,
hLM-CUT takes on average 4.5 more time per state than hLA , and hLM-CUT+ takes 53 more time
per state than hLA . We evaluate selective max with all possible subsets of two or more of these
three heuristics.
While there are other admissible heuristics for SAS+ planning that are competitive with the
three above (for example, Helmert, Haslum, & Hoffmann, 2007; Nissim et al., 2011; Katz &
Domshlak, 2010), they are based on expensive offline preprocessing, followed by very fast
online per-state computation. In contrast, hLA , hLM-CUT and hLM-CUT+ perform most of their
computation online, and thus can be better exploited by selective max.
Additionally, we empirically examine the effectiveness of selective max in deciding whether
to compute a heuristic value at all. This is done by combining our most accurate heuristic,
hLM-CUT+ , with the blind heuristic.
 Heuristic difference bias : The hyper-parameter  controls the tradeoff between computation time and heuristic accuracy. Setting  = 0 sets the threshold  to 0, forcing the decision
rule to always choose the more accurate heuristic. Increasing  increases the threshold, forcing the decision rule to choose the more accurate heuristic h2 only if its value is much higher
than that of h1 . We evaluate selective max with values for  of 0.1, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, 4, and 5.
 Confidence threshold : The confidence threshold  controls the active learning part of selective max. Setting  = 0.5 turns off active learning completely, because the chosen heuristic
always comes with a confidence of at least 0.5. Setting  = 1 would mean using active learning almost always, essentially reducing selective max to regular point-wise maximization. We
evaluate selective max with values for  of 0.51, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, and 0.99.
 Initial sample size N : The initial sample size N is an important parameter, not just because it
is used to train the initial classifier before any active learning is done, but also because it is the
only source of estimates for branching factor, average action cost, and heuristic computation
times. It thus affects the threshold  : Increasing N increases the accuracy of the initial
classifier and of the various aforementioned estimates, but also increases the preprocessing
time. We evaluate selective max with values for N of 10, 100, and 1000.
 Sampling method: The sampling method used to obtain the initial state-space sample is important in that it affects this initial sample, and thus the accuracy of both the threshold  and
of the initial classifier. We evaluate selective max with three different sampling methods, all
P
described in Section 5.1: biased probes (selPh ), unbiased probes (selU
h ), and the sampling
method of Haslum et al. (2007) (selPDB
h ).
 Classifier: The choice of classifier is also very important. The Naive Bayes classifier comB
bines very fast learning and classification (selN
h ). A more sophisticated variant of Naive
Bayes called AODE (Webb et al., 2005) is also considered here (selAODE
). AODE is more
h
1. Of course, all three heuristics are computable in polynomial time from the SAS+ description of the planning task.

723

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

Parameter
Heuristics


N
Sampling method
Classifier

Default value
hLA / hLM-CUT
1
0.6
100
PDB (Haslum et al., 2007)
Naive Bayes

Meaning
heuristics used
heuristic difference bias
confidence threshold
initial sample size
state-space sampling method
classifier type

Table 3: Default parameters for selh .
accurate than Naive Bayes, but has higher classification and learning times, as well as increased memory overhead. Another possible choice is using incremental decision trees (Utgoff et al., 1997), which offer even faster classification, but more expensive learning when the
I
tree structure needs to be changed (selIT
h ). We also consider kNN classifiers (Cover & Hart,
1967), which offer faster learning than Naive Bayes, but usually more expensive classificaN
tion, especially as k grows larger (selkN
, for k = 3, 5).
h
Table 3 describes our default values for each of these independent variables. In each of the
subsequent experiments, we vary one of these independent variables, keeping the rest at their default
values. In all of these experiments, the search for each planning task instance was limited to 30
minutes2 and to 3 GB of memory. The search times do not include the time needed for translating
the planning task from PDDL to SAS+ and building some of the Fast Downward data structures,
which is common to all planners, and is tangential to the issues considered in our study. The search
times do include learning and classification time for selective max.
 Heuristics
We begin by varying the set of heuristics in use. For every possible choice of two or more
heuristics out of the uniform action cost partitioning version of hLA (which we simply refer
to as hLA ), hLM-CUT and hLM-CUT+ , we compare selective max to other methods of heuristic
combination, as well as to the individual heuristics. We compare selective max (selh ) to the
regular maximum (maxh ), as well as to a planner which chooses which heuristic to compute
at each state randomly (rndh ). As it is not clear whether the random choice should favor the
more expensive and accurate heuristic or the cheaper and less accurate one, we simply use a
uniform random choice.
This experiment was conducted on all 31 domains with no conditional effects and axioms
(which none of the heuristics we used support) from the International Planning Competitions
19982008. Because domains vary in difficulty and in the number of tasks, we normalize
the score for each planner in each domain between 0 and 1. Normalizing by the number of
problems in the domain is not a good idea, as it is always possible to generate any number
of effectively unsolvable problems in each domain, so that the fraction of solved problems
will approach zero. Therefore, we normalize the number of problems solved in each domain
by the number of problems in that domain that were solved by at least one of our planners.
While this measure of normalized coverage has the undesirable property that introducing a
2. Each search was given a single core of a 3GHz Intel E8400 CPU machine.

724

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

Heuristic

hLA

hLM-CUT

hLM-CUT+

High variance unit cost
Low variance unit cost
Non-uniform cost

0.89 (175)
0.98 (345)
0.80 (136)

0.83 (136)
0.96 (343)
0.94 (160)

0.81 (132)
0.94 (336)
0.86 (146)

TOTAL

0.91 (656)

0.92 (639)

0.89 (614)

(a) Individual Heuristics
Domains
High variance unit cost
Low variance unit cost
Non-uniform cost
TOTAL

maxh
0.90 (164)
0.97 (345)
0.92 (156)
0.94 (665)

rndh
0.74 (123)
0.95 (342)
0.79 (138)
0.85 (603)

selh
0.93 (174)
0.97 (346)
0.93 (157)
0.95 (677)

hLA / hLM-CUT+

High variance unit cost
Low variance unit cost
Non-uniform cost
TOTAL

0.84 (149)
0.93 (335)
0.85 (144)
0.89 (628)

0.68 (115)
0.88 (327)
0.71 (122)
0.78 (564)

0.90 (164)
0.96 (342)
0.86 (145)
0.92 (651)

hLM-CUT / hLM-CUT+

High variance unit cost
Low variance unit cost
Non-uniform cost
TOTAL

0.80 (131)
0.94 (336)
0.87 (147)
0.89 (614)

0.75 (122)
0.93 (335)
0.86 (145)
0.87 (602)

0.80 (130)
0.97 (344)
0.93 (156)
0.91 (630)

hLA / hLM-CUT / hLM-CUT+

High variance unit cost
Low variance unit cost
Non-uniform cost
TOTAL

0.84 (149)
0.93 (335)
0.85 (144)
0.89 (628)

0.69 (116)
0.90 (332)
0.75 (130)
0.81 (578)

0.87 (154)
0.97 (345)
0.89 (150)
0.92 (649)

Heuristics
hLA / hLM-CUT

(b) Combinations of two or more heuristics

Table 4: Average normalized coverage, and total coverage in parentheses, broken down by groups
of domains with unit cost actions and high variance in coverage, domains with unit cost
actions and low variance in coverage, and domains with non-uniform action costs. Table
(a) shows the results for A with individual heuristics, and table (b) shows the results for
the maximum (maxh ), random choice (rndh ), and selective max (selh ) combinations of
the set of heuristics listed in each major row.

new planner could change the normalized coverage of the other planners, we believe that
it best reflects performance nonetheless. As an overall performance measure, we list the
average normalized coverage score across all domains. Using normalized coverage means
that domains have equal weight in the aggregate score. Additionally, we list for each domain
the number of problems that were solved by any planner (in parentheses next to the domain
name), and for each planner we list the number of problems it solved in parentheses.
Tables 4 and 5 summarize the results of this experiment. We divided the domains in our
experiment into 3 sets: domains with non-uniform action costs, domains with unit action
costs which exhibited a high variance in the number of problems solved between different
725

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

Heuristics

Domains

hLA

hLM-CUT

hLA / hLM-CUT

High variance unit cost
Low variance unit cost
Non-uniform cost
TOTAL

3.23
3.48
13.23
4.82

2.8
1.14
1.01
1.4

hLA / hLM-CUT+

High variance unit cost
Low variance unit cost
Non-uniform cost
TOTAL

4.01
4.55
13.66
5.85

hLM-CUT / hLM-CUT+

High variance unit cost
Low variance unit cost
Non-uniform cost
TOTAL

hLA / hLM-CUT / hLM-CUT+

hLM-CUT+

maxh

rndh

selh

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

3.88
2.14
3.99
2.93

1.46
1.2
1.17
1.25

1.77
1.01
1.0
1.16

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

3.17
2.38
3.85
2.9

2.16
1.85
1.72
1.89

2.29
1.58
1.32
1.66

1.01
1.01
1.03
1.01

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

1.7
1.29
1.18
1.35

1.24
1.19
1.16
1.2

High variance unit cost
Low variance unit cost
Non-uniform cost

4.06
4.65
15.2

3.81
1.59
1.37

1.78
1.02
1.03

1.0
1.0
1.0

3.61
2.05
2.74

2.1
1.57
1.49

TOTAL

6.1

1.91

1.18

1.0

2.56

1.67

Table 5: Geometric mean of ratio of expansions relative to maxh , broken down by groups of domains with unit cost actions and high variance in coverage, domains with unit cost actions
and low variance in coverage, and domains with non-uniform action costs.

planners, and domains with unit action costs which exhibited a low variance in the number of
problems solved between different planners. We make this distinction because we conducted
the following experiments, which examine the effects of the other parameters of selective
max, only on the unit cost action domains which exhibited high variance. Tables 4 and 5
summarize the results for these three sets of domains, as well as for all domains combined.
Detailed, per-domain results are relegated to Appendix A.
Table 4 lists the normalized coverage score, averaged across all domains, and the total number
of problems solved in parentheses. Table 4a lists these for each individual heuristic, and
Table 4b for every combination method of every set of two or more heuristics. Table 5 shows
how accurate each of these heuristic combination methods is. Since, for a given set of base
heuristics, maxh is the most accurate heuristic possible, the accuracy is evaluated relative to
maxh . We evaluate each heuristics accuracy on each task as the number of states expanded
by A using that heuristic, divided by the number of states expanded by A using maxh . We
compute the geometric mean for each domain over the tasks solved by all planners of this
accuracy ratio, and list here the geometric mean over these numbers. Each row lists the
results for a combination of two or three heuristics; for combinations of two heuristics, we
leave the cell representing the heuristic that is not in the combination empty.
Looking at the results of individual heuristics first, we see that the most accurate heuristic
(hLM-CUT+ ) does not do well overall, while the least accurate heuristic (hLA ) solved the most
tasks in total, and hLM-CUT wins in terms of normalized coverage. However, when looking at
the results for individual domains, we see that the best heuristic to use varies, indicating that
combining different heuristics could indeed be of practical value.
We now turn our attention to the empirical results for the combinations of all possible subsets
of two or more heuristics. The results clearly demonstrate that when more than one heuristic
is used, selective max is always better than regular maximum or random choice, both in terms
of normalized coverage and absolute number of problems solved. Furthermore, the poor
performance of rndh , in both coverage and accuracy, demonstrates that the decision rule and
726

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

700

650

Solved Instances

600

550

500

450

400
maxh

350

rndh
selh

300
200

400

600

800
1000
Timeout (seconds)

1200

1400

1600

1800

Figure 4: hLA / hLM-CUT / hLM-CUT+ anytime profile. Each line shows the number of problems from
IPC 1998  2006 solved by the maximum (maxh ), random choice (rndh ), and selective
max (selh ) combination methods of the hLA , hLM-CUT , and hLM-CUT+ heuristics, under
different timeouts.

the classifier used in selective max are important to its success, and that computing only one
heuristic at each state randomly is insufficient, to say the least.
When compared to individual heuristics, selective max does at least as well as each of the
individual heuristics it uses, for all combinations except that of hLM-CUT and hLM-CUT+ . This
is most likely because hLM-CUT and hLM-CUT+ are based on a very similar procedure, and
thus their heuristic estimates are highly correlated. To see why this hinders selective max,
consider the extreme case of two heuristics which have a correlation of 1.0 (that is, yield the
same heuristic values), where selective max can offer no benefit. Finally, we remark that the
best planner in this experiment was the selective max combination of hLA and hLM-CUT .
The above results are all based on a 30 minute time limit, which, while commonly used in the
IPC, is arbitrary, and the number of tasks solved after 30 minutes does not tell the complete
tale. Here, we examine the anytime profile of the different heuristic combination methods, by
plotting the number of tasks solved under different timeouts, up to a timeout of 30 minutes.
Figure 4 shows this plot for the three combination methods when all three heuristics are used.
As the figure shows, the advantage of selh over the baseline combination methods is even
greater under shorter timeouts. This indicates that the advantage of selh over maxh is even
727

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

Heuristics
hLA / hLM-CUT

Overhead
12%

hLA / hLM-CUT+

15%

hLM-CUT / hLM-CUT+

9%

hLA / hLM-CUT / hLM-CUT+

10%

Table 6: Selective max overhead. Each row lists the average percentage of time spent on learning
and classification, out of the total time taken by selective max, for each set of heuristics.

greater than is evident from the results after 30 minutes, and that selh is indeed effective for
minimizing search time. Since the anytime plots for the combinations of pairs of heuristics
are very similar, we omit them here for the sake of brevity.
Finally, we present overhead statistics for using selective max  the proportion of time spent
on learning and classification, including the time spent obtaining the initial state-space sample, out of the total solution time. Table 6 presents the average overhead on selective max
for each of the combinations of two or more heuristics. Detailed, per-domain results are
presented in Table 18 in Appendix A. As these results show, selective max does incur a noticeable overhead, but it is still relatively low. It is also worth mentioning that the overhead
varies significantly between different domains.
We also performed an empirical evaluation of using selective max with an accurate heuristic
alongside the blind heuristic. The blind heuristic returns 0 for goal states, and the cost of
the cheapest action for non-goal states. For this experiment, we chose our most accurate
heuristic, hLM-CUT+ . We compare the performance of A using hLM-CUT+ alone, to that of A
using selective max of hLM-CUT+ and the blind heuristic. Because the blind heuristic returns
a constant value for all non-goal states, the decision rule that selective max uses to combine
some heuristic h with the blind heuristic hb is simply h(s)   + hb , that is, compute h
when the predicted value of h is greater than some constant threshold. Recall that, when
h(s) + g(s) < c , computing h is simply a waste of time, because s will not be pruned.
Therefore, it only makes sense to compute h(s) when h(s)  c  g(s). Note that this
threshold for computing h depends on g(s), and thus is not constant. This shows that a
constant threshold for computing h(s) is not the best possible decision rule. Unfortunately,
the selective max decision rule is based on an approximation that fails to capture the subtleties
of this case.
Table 7 shows the normalized coverage of A using hLM-CUT+ , and A using selective max of
hLM-CUT+ and the blind heuristic. As the results show, selective max has little effect in most
domains, though it does harm performance in some, and in one domain  OPENSTACKS  it
actually performs better than the single heuristic. Table 8 shows the average expansions ratio,
using the number of states expanded by hLM-CUT+ as the baseline; note that using the blind
heuristic never increases heuristic accuracy. As these results show, selective max chooses to
use the blind heuristic quite often, expanding on average more than twice as many states than
A with hLM-CUT+ alone.
728

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

coverage

hLM-CUT+

selh

airport (31)
freecell (13)
logistics00 (17)
mprime (24)
mystery (17)
pipesworld-tankage (9)
satellite (9)
zenotravel (12)

1.00 (31)
1.00 (13)
1.00 (17)
1.00 (24)
1.00 (17)
1.00 (9)
1.00 (9)
1.00 (12)

1.00 (31)
1.00 (13)
1.00 (17)
1.00 (24)
1.00 (17)
1.00 (9)
1.00 (9)
1.00 (12)

blocks (27)
depot (7)
driverlog (14)
grid (2)
gripper (6)
logistics98 (6)
miconic (140)
pathways (5)
pipesworld-notankage (17)
psr-small (48)
rovers (7)
schedule (27)
storage (15)
tpp (6)
trucks-strips (9)

1.00 (27)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
1.00 (2)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (140)
1.00 (5)
1.00 (17)
1.00 (48)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (27)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (9)

1.00 (27)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
1.00 (2)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (6)
0.86 (121)
1.00 (5)
1.00 (17)
1.00 (48)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (27)
0.93 (14)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (9)

elevators-opt08-strips (18)
openstacks-opt08-strips (19)
parcprinter-08-strips (21)
pegsol-08-strips (27)
scanalyzer-08-strips (13)
sokoban-opt08-strips (25)
transport-opt08-strips (11)
woodworking-opt08-strips (14)

1.00 (18)
0.89 (17)
1.00 (21)
1.00 (27)
1.00 (13)
1.00 (25)
1.00 (11)
1.00 (14)

0.83 (15)
1.00 (19)
1.00 (21)
1.00 (27)
0.77 (10)
1.00 (25)
1.00 (11)
0.93 (13)

TOTAL

1.00 (614)

0.98 (589)

Table 7: Normalized coverage of hLM-CUT+ and selective max combining hLM-CUT+ with the blind
heuristic. Domains are grouped into domains with unit cost actions and high variance in
coverage, domains with unit cost actions and low variance in coverage, and domains with
non-uniform action costs, respectively.

729

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

expansions

hLM-CUT+

selh

airport (31)
freecell (13)
logistics00 (17)
mprime (24)
mystery (18)
pipesworld-tankage (9)
satellite (9)
zenotravel (12)

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

1.0
3.13
1.02
1.22
3.2
4.23
3.11
2.37

blocks (27)
depot (7)
driverlog (14)
grid (2)
gripper (6)
logistics98 (6)
miconic (121)
pathways (5)
pipesworld-notankage (17)
psr-small (48)
rovers (7)
schedule (27)
storage (14)
tpp (6)
trucks-strips (9)

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

1.92
1.36
1.15
7.67
1.0
1.18
14.24
1.0
1.27
2.12
1.56
1.21
5.11
1.6
1.01

elevators-opt08-strips (15)
openstacks-opt08-strips (17)
parcprinter-08-strips (21)
pegsol-08-strips (27)
scanalyzer-08-strips (10)
sokoban-opt08-strips (25)
transport-opt08-strips (11)
woodworking-opt08-strips (13)

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

13.41
1.08
1.24
1.01
4.87
1.0
5.86
46.97

GEOMETRIC MEAN

1.0

2.3

Table 8: Average ratio of expanded states between the baseline of hLM-CUT+ and selective max
combining hLM-CUT+ with the blind heuristic. Domains are grouped into domains with
unit cost actions and high variance in coverage, domains with unit cost actions and low
variance in coverage, and domains with non-uniform action costs, respectively.

730

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

The above experiments have varied the heuristics which selective max uses. In the following
experiments, we fix the set of heuristics, and examine the impact of the other parameters of selective max on performance. As we still need to evaluate over 20 different configurations of selective
max, we will focus on eight selected domains: AIRPORT, FREECELL, LOGISTICS 00, MPRIME, MYS TERY , PIPESWORLD - TANKAGE, SATELLITE , and ZENOTRAVEL. These are the eight domains with the
highest observed variance in the number of tasks solved across different planners, out of the unit
action cost domains we used. These domains were chosen in order to reduce the computation time
required for these experiments to a manageable quantity. We excluded domains with non-uniform
action costs, because they use a different method of estimating the goal depth for the state-space
sampling method, which is one of the parameters we examine. Below, we focus on one parameter
of selective max at a time, and present the total number of tasks solved in our eight chosen domains,
under different values of that parameter. Detailed, per-domain results for each parameter appear in
Appendix A.
 hyper-parameter 
Figure 5a plots the total number of problems solved, under different values of . As these
results show, selective max is fairly robust with respect to the value of , unless a very large
value for  is chosen, making it more difficult for selective max to choose the more accurate
heuristic.
Detailed, per-domain results appear in Table 19 in Appendix A, as well as in Figure 6. These
results show a more complex picture, where there seems to be some cutoff value for each
domain, such that increasing  past that value impairs performance. The one exception to
this is the PIPESWORLD - TANKAGE domain, where setting  = 5 helps.
 confidence threshold 
Figure 5b plots the total number of problems solved, under different values of , Detailed,
per-domain results appear in Table 20 in Appendix A. These results indicate that selective
max is also robust to values of , unless it is set to a very low value, causing selective max to
behave like the regular point-wise maximum.
 initial sample size N
Figure 5c plots the total number of problems solved under different values of N . with the
x-axis in logscale. Detailed, per-domain results appear in Table 21 in Appendix A. As the
results show, our default value of N = 100 is the best (of the three values we tried), although
selective max is still fairly robust with respect to the choice of parameter.
 sampling method
Figure 7 shows the total number of problems solved using different methods for the initial
state-space sampling. Detailed, per-domain results appear in Table 22 in Appendix A. As
the results demonstrate, the choice of sampling method can notably affect the performance of
selective max. However, as the detailed results show, this effect is only evident in the FREE CELL domain. We also remark that our default sampling method, PDB, performs worse than
the others. Indeed by using the probe based sampling methods, selective max outperforms A
using hLA alone. However, as this difference is only due to the FREECELL domain, we can not
state with certainty that this would generalize across all domains.
731

fiSolved Instances

D OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

174
172
170
168
166
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5


3

3.5

4

4.5

5

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

1

Solved Instances

(a) Hyper-parameter 

174
172
170
168
166
0.5

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75


Solved Instances

(b) Confidence threshold 

174
172
170
168
166
10

100


1000

(c) Initial Sample Size N
Figure 5: Number of problems solved by selective max under different values for (a) hyperparameter  (b) confidence threshold , and (c) initial sample size N .

732

fiSolved Instances

O NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5

airport
freecell
logistics00
mprime
mystery
pw-tankage
satellite
zenotravel
0

1

2

3

4

5



Figure 6: Number of problems solved by selective in each domain under different values for .

180
160

Solved Instances

140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

PDB
174

Probe
178
Sampling Method

UnbiasedProbe
180

Figure 7: Number of problems solved by selective max with different sampling methods.

733

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

180
160

Solved Instances

140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
NB
174

AODE
168

ITI
156
Classifier

3NN
158

5NN
161

Figure 8: Number of problems solved by selective max with different classifiers.
 classifier
Figure 8 shows the total number of problems solved using different classifiers. Detailed,
per-domain results appear in Table 23 in Appendix A. Naive Bayes appears to be the best
classifier to use with selective max, although AODE also performs quite well. Even though
kNN enjoys very fast learning, the classifier is used mostly for classification, and as expected,
kNN does not do well. However, the increased accuracy of k = 5 seems to pay off against
the faster classification when k = 3.
6.3 Comparison with Sequential Portfolios
Sequential portfolio solvers for optimal planning are another approach for exploiting the merits of
different heuristic functions, and they have been very successful in practice, with the Fast Downward
Stone Soup sequential portfolio (Helmert et al., 2011) winning the sequential optimal track at IPC2011. A sequential portfolio utilizes different solvers by running them sequentially, each with a prespecified time limit. If one solver fails to find a solution under its allotted time limit, the sequential
portfolio terminates it, and moves on to the next solver. However, a sequential portfolio solver
needs to know the time allowance for the problem it is trying to solve beforehand, a setting known
as contract anytime (Russell & Zilberstein, 1991). In contrast, selective max can be used in an
interruptible anytime manner, where the time limit need not be known in advance.
Here, we compare selective max to sequential portfolios of A with the same heuristics. As
we have the exact time it took A search using each heuristic alone to solve each problem, we can
determine whether a sequential portfolio which assigns each heuristic some time limit will be able
to solve each problem. Using this data, we simulate the results of two types of sequential portfolio
planners. In the first setting, we assume that the time limit is known in advance, and simulate the
results of a contract portfolio giving an equal share of time to all heuristics. In the second setting, we
simulate an interruptible anytime portfolio by using binary exponential backoff time limits: starting
734

fi700

700

650

650
Solved Instances

Solved Instances

O NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

600
550
500

selh
portctr

450

600
550
500

selh
portctr

450

portint

portint

400

400
200

400

600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
Timeout (seconds)

200

700

700

650

650

600
550
500

selh
portctr

450

600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
Timeout (seconds)

hLA / hLM-CUT+
(b)

Solved Instances

Solved Instances

hLA / hLM-CUT
(a)

400

600
550
500

selh
portctr

450

portint

portint

400

400
200

400

600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
Timeout (seconds)

200

hLM-CUT / hLM-CUT+
(c)

400

600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
Timeout (seconds)

hLA / hLM-CUT / hLM-CUT+
(d)

Figure 9: Anytime profiles of sequential portfolios and selective max. Each plot shows the number of problems solved by selective max (selh ), a simulated contract anytime portfolio
(portctr ), and a simulated interruptible portfolio (portint ) using (a) hLA and hLM-CUT (b)
hLA and hLM-CUT+ (c) hLM-CUT and hLM-CUT+ , and (d) hLA , hLM-CUT , and hLM-CUT+ .

with a time limit of 1 second for each heuristic, we increase the time limit by a factor of 2 if none
of the heuristics were able to guide A to solve the planning problem. There are several possible
orderings for the heuristics here, and we use the de facto best ordering for each problem. We denote
the contract anytime portfolio by portctr , and the interruptible anytime portfolio by portint .
Figure 9 shows the number of problems solved under different time limits for selective max,
the contract anytime sequential portfolio, and the interruptible anytime sequential portfolio. As
these results show, the contract anytime sequential portfolio almost always outperforms selective
max. On the other hand, when the sequential portfolio does not know the time limit in advance, its
performance deteriorates significantly. The best heuristic combination for selective max, hLA and
hLM-CUT , outperforms the interruptible anytime portfolio using the same heuristics, and so does the
735

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

selective max combination of hLM-CUT and hLM-CUT+ . With the other combinations of heuristics,
the interruptible anytime portfolio performs better than selective max.

7. Discussion
Learning for planning has been a very active field since the early days of planning (Fikes, Hart,
& Nilsson, 1972), and is recently receiving growing attention in the community. However, despite
some early work (Rendell, 1983), relatively little work has dealt with learning for state-space search
guided by distance-estimating heuristics, one of the most prominent approaches to planning these
days. Most works in this direction have been devoted to learning macro-actions (see, for example,
Finkelstein & Markovitch, 1998; Botea, Enzenberger, Muller, & Schaeffer, 2005; Coles & Smith,
2007). Recently, learning for heuristic search planning has received more attention: Yoon et al.
(2008) suggested learning (inadmissible) heuristic functions based upon features extracted from
relaxed plans. Arfaee, Zilles, and Holte (2010) attempted to learn an almost admissible heuristic
estimate using a neural network. Perhaps the most closely related work to ours is that of Thayer,
Dionne, and Ruml (2011), who learn to correct errors in heuristic estimates online. Thayer et al. attempt to improve the accuracy of a single given heuristic, while selective max attempts to choose one
of several given heuristics for each state. The two works differ technically on this point. More importantly, however, none of the aforementioned approaches can guarantee that the resulting heuristic
will be admissible, and thus that an optimal solution will be found. In contrast, our focus is on optimal planning, and we are not aware of any previous work that deals with learning for optimal
heuristic search.
Our experimental evaluation demonstrates that selective max is a more effective method for
combining arbitrary admissible heuristics than the baseline point-wise maximization. Also advantageous is selective maxs ability to exploit pairs of heuristics, where one is guaranteed to always
be at least as accurate as the other. For example, the hLA heuristic can be used with two action
cost partitioning schemes: uniform and optimal (Karpas & Domshlak, 2009). The heuristic induced
by the optimal action cost partitioning is at least as accurate the one induced by the uniform action
cost partitioning, but takes much longer to compute. Selective max might be used to learn when
it is worth spending the extra time to compute the optimal cost partitioning, and when it is not. In
contrast, the max-based combination of these two heuristics would simply waste the time spent on
computing the uniform action cost partitioning.
The controlled parametric experiments demonstrate that the right choice of classifier and of
the sampling method for the initial state-space sample is very important. The other parameters of
selective max do not appear to affect performance too much, as long as they are set to reasonable
values. This implies that selective max could be improved by using faster, more accurate, classifiers,
and by developing sampling methods that can represent the state-space well.
Finally, we remark that the Fast Downward Autotune entry in the sequential optimal track of
the 2011 edition of the International Planning Competition, which used ParamILS (Hutter, Hoos,
Leyton-Brown, & Stutzle, 2009) to choose the best configuration for the Fast Downward planner,
chose to use selective-max to combine hLM-CUT and hmax (Bonet, Loerincs, & Geffner, 1997).
This provides further evidence that selective max is a practically valuable method for combining
heuristics in optimal planning.
736

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

coverage

hLA

hLM-CUT

hLM-CUT+

airport (33)
freecell (58)
logistics00 (21)
mprime (24)
mystery (17)
pipesworld-tankage (13)
satellite (10)
zenotravel (13)

0.91 (30)
1.00 (58)
1.00 (21)
0.88 (21)
0.88 (15)
1.00 (13)
0.70 (7)
0.77 (10)

0.85 (28)
0.26 (15)
0.95 (20)
1.00 (24)
1.00 (17)
0.92 (12)
0.70 (7)
1.00 (13)

0.94 (31)
0.22 (13)
0.81 (17)
1.00 (24)
1.00 (17)
0.69 (9)
0.90 (9)
0.92 (12)

blocks (28)
depot (7)
driverlog (14)
grid (3)
gripper (7)
logistics98 (6)
miconic (142)
pathways (5)
pipesworld-notankage (18)
psr-small (49)
rovers (8)
schedule (30)
storage (15)
tpp (6)
trucks-strips (10)

0.96 (27)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
1.00 (3)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (142)
0.80 (4)
1.00 (18)
1.00 (49)
1.00 (8)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
0.93 (13)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
0.99 (141)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
1.00 (49)
0.88 (7)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (10)

0.96 (27)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
0.67 (2)
0.86 (6)
1.00 (6)
0.99 (140)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
0.98 (48)
0.88 (7)
0.90 (27)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

elevators-opt08-strips (22)
openstacks-opt08-strips (20)
parcprinter-08-strips (22)
pegsol-08-strips (28)
scanalyzer-08-strips (16)
sokoban-opt08-strips (30)
transport-opt08-strips (12)
woodworking-opt08-strips (19)

0.77 (17)
0.90 (18)
0.68 (15)
0.96 (27)
0.56 (9)
0.83 (25)
1.00 (12)
0.68 (13)

1.00 (22)
1.00 (20)
0.82 (18)
1.00 (28)
0.94 (15)
1.00 (30)
0.92 (11)
0.84 (16)

0.82 (18)
0.85 (17)
0.95 (21)
0.96 (27)
0.81 (13)
0.83 (25)
0.92 (11)
0.74 (14)

TOTAL

0.91 (656)

0.92 (639)

0.89 (614)

Table 9: Detailed per-domain results of A with each individual heuristic. Normalized coverage is
shown, with the number of problems solved shown in parentheses. Domains are grouped
into domains with unit cost actions and high variance in coverage, domains with unit
cost actions and low variance in coverage, and domains with non-uniform action costs,
respectively.

Acknowledgments
The work was partly supported by the Israel Science Foundation (ISF) grant 1045/12.

Appendix A. Detailed Results of Empirical Evaluation
In this appendix, we present detailed per-domain, results of the experiments described in Section 6.
Table 9 shows the normalized coverage and number of problems solved in each domain, for
individual heuristics. The normalized coverage score of planner X on domain D is the number of
problems from domain D solved by planner X, divided by the number of problems from domain
D solved by at least one planner. Tables 10  17 give the results for combinations of two or more
heuristics. Tables 10, 12, 14, and 16 list the normalized coverage of the individual heuristics used,
and of their combination using selective max (selh ), regular maximum (maxh ), and random choice
of heuristic at each state (rndh ) after 30 minutes. Tables 11, 13, 15, and 17 give the geometric
mean of the ratio of expanded states relative to maxh in each domain, over problems solved by
all configurations. The number of tasks solved by all planners is listed in parentheses next to each
domain. The final row gives the geometric mean over the geometric means of each domain.
737

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

coverage

hLA

hLM-CUT

maxh

rndh

selh

airport (33)
freecell (58)
logistics00 (21)
mprime (24)
mystery (17)
pipesworld-tankage (13)
satellite (10)
zenotravel (13)

0.91 (30)
1.00 (58)
1.00 (21)
0.88 (21)
0.88 (15)
1.00 (13)
0.70 (7)
0.77 (10)

0.85 (28)
0.26 (15)
0.95 (20)
1.00 (24)
1.00 (17)
0.92 (12)
0.70 (7)
1.00 (13)

0.91 (30)
0.71 (41)
0.95 (20)
1.00 (24)
1.00 (17)
0.92 (12)
0.70 (7)
1.00 (13)

0.85 (28)
0.28 (16)
0.95 (20)
0.75 (18)
0.76 (13)
0.85 (11)
0.70 (7)
0.77 (10)

0.91 (30)
0.84 (49)
1.00 (21)
1.00 (24)
1.00 (17)
0.92 (12)
0.80 (8)
1.00 (13)

blocks (28)
depot (7)
driverlog (14)
grid (3)
gripper (7)
logistics98 (6)
miconic (142)
pathways (5)
pipesworld-notankage (18)
psr-small (49)
rovers (8)
schedule (30)
storage (15)
tpp (6)
trucks-strips (10)

0.96 (27)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
1.00 (3)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (142)
0.80 (4)
1.00 (18)
1.00 (49)
1.00 (8)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
0.93 (13)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
0.99 (141)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
1.00 (49)
0.88 (7)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (10)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
0.99 (141)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
1.00 (49)
1.00 (8)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (10)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
0.93 (13)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
0.99 (141)
0.80 (4)
0.94 (17)
1.00 (49)
1.00 (8)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (142)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
1.00 (49)
1.00 (8)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (10)

elevators-opt08-strips (22)
openstacks-opt08-strips (20)
parcprinter-08-strips (22)
pegsol-08-strips (28)
scanalyzer-08-strips (16)
sokoban-opt08-strips (30)
transport-opt08-strips (12)
woodworking-opt08-strips (19)

0.77 (17)
0.90 (18)
0.68 (15)
0.96 (27)
0.56 (9)
0.83 (25)
1.00 (12)
0.68 (13)

1.00 (22)
1.00 (20)
0.82 (18)
1.00 (28)
0.94 (15)
1.00 (30)
0.92 (11)
0.84 (16)

1.00 (22)
0.90 (18)
0.82 (18)
0.96 (27)
0.94 (15)
0.97 (29)
0.92 (11)
0.84 (16)

0.77 (17)
0.90 (18)
0.68 (15)
0.96 (27)
0.44 (7)
1.00 (30)
0.92 (11)
0.68 (13)

1.00 (22)
0.90 (18)
0.82 (18)
0.96 (27)
0.94 (15)
0.97 (29)
0.92 (11)
0.89 (17)

TOTAL

0.91 (656)

0.92 (639)

0.94 (665)

0.85 (603)

0.95 (677)

Table 10: Detailed per-domain normalized coverage using hLA and hLM-CUT . Each line shows the
normalized coverage in each domain, with the number of problems solved is shown in
parentheses. Domains are grouped into domains with unit cost actions and high variance
in coverage, domains with unit cost actions and low variance in coverage, and domains
with non-uniform action costs, respectively.

738

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

expansions

hLA

hLM-CUT

maxh

rndh

selh

airport (28)
freecell (15)
logistics00 (20)
mprime (18)
mystery (14)
pipesworld-tankage (11)
satellite (7)
zenotravel (10)

2.88
1.01
1.0
6.34
7.9
1.61
6.27
7.98

1.12
529.61
1.0
1.89
1.15
2.35
1.26
1.0

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

1.61
116.96
1.0
4.2
5.19
1.62
2.32
3.3

2.2
2.14
1.0
1.52
1.17
1.12
1.09
2.02

blocks (27)
depot (7)
driverlog (13)
grid (2)
gripper (7)
logistics98 (6)
miconic (141)
pathways (4)
pipesworld-notankage (17)
psr-small (49)
rovers (7)
schedule (30)
storage (15)
tpp (6)
trucks-strips (9)

7.4
3.45
7.2
2.15
1.0
7.74
1.0
39.65
2.01
1.27
2.18
1.15
2.16
1.74
46.11

1.0
1.32
1.09
1.73
1.04
1.0
1.0
1.0
2.16
1.0
1.31
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.02

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

2.2
1.91
2.89
1.57
1.02
2.69
1.0
17.91
1.97
1.11
1.77
1.03
1.45
1.42
12.12

1.61
1.3
1.24
1.83
1.0
1.08
1.0
1.0
1.36
1.15
1.09
1.15
1.56
1.0
1.01

elevators-opt08-strips (17)
openstacks-opt08-strips (18)
parcprinter-08-strips (15)
pegsol-08-strips (27)
scanalyzer-08-strips (7)
sokoban-opt08-strips (25)
transport-opt08-strips (11)
woodworking-opt08-strips (12)

21.51
1.17
24.13
3.72
69.2
15.74
12.09
31.6

1.03
1.0
1.0
1.01
1.0
1.07
1.01
1.0

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

5.99
1.03
9.34
1.8
21.47
1.33
3.79
5.68

1.37
1.15
1.0
1.01
1.14
1.04
1.44
1.28

GEOMETRIC MEAN

4.82

1.4

1.0

2.93

1.25

Table 11: Detailed per-domain expansions relative to maxh using hLA and hLM-CUT . Each row
shows the geometric mean of the ratio of expanded nodes relative to maxh . Domains are
grouped into domains with unit cost actions and high variance in coverage, domains with
unit cost actions and low variance in coverage, and domains with non-uniform action
costs, respectively.

739

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

coverage

hLA

hLM-CUT+

maxh

rndh

selh

airport (33)
freecell (58)
logistics00 (21)
mprime (24)
mystery (17)
pipesworld-tankage (13)
satellite (10)
zenotravel (13)

0.91 (30)
1.00 (58)
1.00 (21)
0.88 (21)
0.88 (15)
1.00 (13)
0.70 (7)
0.77 (10)

0.94 (31)
0.22 (13)
0.81 (17)
1.00 (24)
1.00 (17)
0.69 (9)
0.90 (9)
0.92 (12)

0.94 (31)
0.53 (31)
0.76 (16)
1.00 (24)
1.00 (17)
0.69 (9)
0.90 (9)
0.92 (12)

0.85 (28)
0.26 (15)
0.95 (20)
0.67 (16)
0.71 (12)
0.62 (8)
0.70 (7)
0.69 (9)

0.91 (30)
0.71 (41)
1.00 (21)
1.00 (24)
1.00 (17)
0.69 (9)
1.00 (10)
0.92 (12)

blocks (28)
depot (7)
driverlog (14)
grid (3)
gripper (7)
logistics98 (6)
miconic (142)
pathways (5)
pipesworld-notankage (18)
psr-small (49)
rovers (8)
schedule (30)
storage (15)
tpp (6)
trucks-strips (10)

0.96 (27)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
1.00 (3)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (142)
0.80 (4)
1.00 (18)
1.00 (49)
1.00 (8)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

0.96 (27)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
0.67 (2)
0.86 (6)
1.00 (6)
0.99 (140)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
0.98 (48)
0.88 (7)
0.90 (27)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

0.96 (27)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
0.67 (2)
0.71 (5)
1.00 (6)
0.99 (140)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
0.98 (48)
0.88 (7)
0.90 (27)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

0.93 (26)
0.86 (6)
0.93 (13)
0.67 (2)
0.86 (6)
0.83 (5)
0.99 (140)
0.80 (4)
0.83 (15)
0.98 (48)
0.88 (7)
0.90 (27)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.70 (7)

0.93 (26)
1.00 (7)
0.93 (13)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (142)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
1.00 (49)
1.00 (8)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

elevators-opt08-strips (22)
openstacks-opt08-strips (20)
parcprinter-08-strips (22)
pegsol-08-strips (28)
scanalyzer-08-strips (16)
sokoban-opt08-strips (30)
transport-opt08-strips (12)
woodworking-opt08-strips (19)

0.77 (17)
0.90 (18)
0.68 (15)
0.96 (27)
0.56 (9)
0.83 (25)
1.00 (12)
0.68 (13)

0.82 (18)
0.85 (17)
0.95 (21)
0.96 (27)
0.81 (13)
0.83 (25)
0.92 (11)
0.74 (14)

0.82 (18)
0.80 (16)
0.95 (21)
0.96 (27)
0.81 (13)
0.77 (23)
0.92 (11)
0.79 (15)

0.59 (13)
0.85 (17)
0.55 (12)
0.96 (27)
0.38 (6)
0.83 (25)
0.92 (11)
0.58 (11)

0.73 (16)
0.85 (17)
1.00 (22)
0.96 (27)
0.81 (13)
0.80 (24)
0.92 (11)
0.79 (15)

TOTAL

0.91 (656)

0.89 (614)

0.89 (628)

0.78 (564)

0.92 (651)

Table 12: Detailed per-domain normalized coverage using hLA and hLM-CUT+ . Each line shows the
normalized coverage in each domain, with the number of problems solved is shown in
parentheses. Domains are grouped into domains with unit cost actions and high variance
in coverage, domains with unit cost actions and low variance in coverage, and domains
with non-uniform action costs, respectively.

740

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

expansions

hLA

hLM-CUT+

maxh

rndh

selh

airport (28)
freecell (13)
logistics00 (16)
mprime (16)
mystery (13)
pipesworld-tankage (8)
satellite (7)
zenotravel (9)

3.05
1.22
1.0
8.45
7.76
2.17
19.26
6.62

1.0
47.57
1.0
1.23
1.11
1.42
1.03
1.0

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

1.43
10.54
1.0
5.2
4.77
1.48
5.94
3.09

2.81
2.05
1.0
1.57
1.7
1.86
4.12
4.04

blocks (26)
depot (6)
driverlog (13)
grid (2)
gripper (5)
logistics98 (5)
miconic (140)
pathways (4)
pipesworld-notankage (15)
psr-small (48)
rovers (7)
schedule (27)
storage (15)
tpp (6)
trucks-strips (7)

6.97
21.8
11.11
5.04
1.0
6.1
1.0
40.56
3.08
1.31
2.75
1.09
2.29
2.72
46.09

1.0
1.0
1.01
1.01
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.12
1.0
1.01
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.01

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

2.15
5.46
3.71
2.14
1.0
2.14
1.0
18.03
1.75
1.14
1.81
1.0
1.53
1.88
12.02

4.28
3.96
2.56
4.74
1.0
3.79
1.0
1.0
2.46
1.27
1.45
1.09
2.16
1.17
1.01

elevators-opt08-strips (13)
openstacks-opt08-strips (16)
parcprinter-08-strips (12)
pegsol-08-strips (27)
scanalyzer-08-strips (6)
sokoban-opt08-strips (21)
transport-opt08-strips (11)
woodworking-opt08-strips (11)

28.6
1.17
24.87
4.92
23.07
15.66
15.34
53.27

1.01
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

7.1
1.03
9.23
2.15
6.88
1.33
4.26
8.53

7.46
1.09
1.19
1.0
1.43
1.01
2.84
1.91

GEOMETRIC MEAN

5.85

1.16

1.0

2.9

1.89

Table 13: Detailed per-domain expansions relative to maxh using hLA and hLM-CUT+ . Each row
shows the geometric mean of the ratio of expanded nodes relative to maxh . Domains are
grouped into domains with unit cost actions and high variance in coverage, domains with
unit cost actions and low variance in coverage, and domains with non-uniform action
costs, respectively.

741

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

coverage

hLM-CUT

hLM-CUT+

maxh

rndh

selh

airport (33)
freecell (58)
logistics00 (21)
mprime (24)
mystery (17)
pipesworld-tankage (13)
satellite (10)
zenotravel (13)

0.85 (28)
0.26 (15)
0.95 (20)
1.00 (24)
1.00 (17)
0.92 (12)
0.70 (7)
1.00 (13)

0.94 (31)
0.22 (13)
0.81 (17)
1.00 (24)
1.00 (17)
0.69 (9)
0.90 (9)
0.92 (12)

0.94 (31)
0.22 (13)
0.76 (16)
1.00 (24)
1.00 (17)
0.69 (9)
0.90 (9)
0.92 (12)

0.82 (27)
0.21 (12)
0.95 (20)
0.88 (21)
0.88 (15)
0.62 (8)
0.70 (7)
0.92 (12)

0.85 (28)
0.22 (13)
0.95 (20)
1.00 (24)
0.94 (16)
0.69 (9)
0.80 (8)
0.92 (12)

blocks (28)
depot (7)
driverlog (14)
grid (3)
gripper (7)
logistics98 (6)
miconic (142)
pathways (5)
pipesworld-notankage (18)
psr-small (49)
rovers (8)
schedule (30)
storage (15)
tpp (6)
trucks-strips (10)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
0.93 (13)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
0.99 (141)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
1.00 (49)
0.88 (7)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (10)

0.96 (27)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
0.67 (2)
0.86 (6)
1.00 (6)
0.99 (140)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
0.98 (48)
0.88 (7)
0.90 (27)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

0.96 (27)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
0.67 (2)
0.86 (6)
1.00 (6)
0.99 (140)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
0.98 (48)
0.88 (7)
0.90 (27)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
0.93 (13)
0.67 (2)
0.86 (6)
1.00 (6)
0.99 (140)
1.00 (5)
0.89 (16)
0.98 (48)
0.88 (7)
0.90 (27)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
0.99 (141)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
1.00 (49)
0.88 (7)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (10)

elevators-opt08-strips (22)
openstacks-opt08-strips (20)
parcprinter-08-strips (22)
pegsol-08-strips (28)
scanalyzer-08-strips (16)
sokoban-opt08-strips (30)
transport-opt08-strips (12)
woodworking-opt08-strips (19)

1.00 (22)
1.00 (20)
0.82 (18)
1.00 (28)
0.94 (15)
1.00 (30)
0.92 (11)
0.84 (16)

0.82 (18)
0.85 (17)
0.95 (21)
0.96 (27)
0.81 (13)
0.83 (25)
0.92 (11)
0.74 (14)

0.82 (18)
0.85 (17)
0.95 (21)
0.96 (27)
0.81 (13)
0.83 (25)
0.92 (11)
0.79 (15)

0.82 (18)
0.95 (19)
0.82 (18)
0.96 (27)
0.81 (13)
0.83 (25)
0.92 (11)
0.74 (14)

0.95 (21)
0.95 (19)
0.91 (20)
0.96 (27)
0.94 (15)
0.83 (25)
0.92 (11)
0.95 (18)

TOTAL

0.92 (639)

0.89 (614)

0.89 (614)

0.87 (602)

0.91 (630)

Table 14: Detailed per-domain normalized coverage using hLM-CUT and hLM-CUT+ . Each line shows
the normalized coverage in each domain, with the number of problems solved is shown in
parentheses. Domains are grouped into domains with unit cost actions and high variance
in coverage, domains with unit cost actions and low variance in coverage, and domains
with non-uniform action costs, respectively.

742

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

expansions

hLM-CUT

hLM-CUT+

maxh

rndh

selh

airport (26)
freecell (12)
logistics00 (16)
mprime (21)
mystery (16)
pipesworld-tankage (8)
satellite (7)
zenotravel (12)

1.16
9.55
1.0
2.2
1.69
3.09
3.66
1.61

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.01
1.01
1.01
0.98
1.09

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

1.04
4.37
1.0
1.84
1.52
1.75
2.39
1.3

1.16
1.26
1.0
1.0
1.32
1.61
1.51
1.22

blocks (27)
depot (7)
driverlog (13)
grid (2)
gripper (6)
logistics98 (6)
miconic (140)
pathways (5)
pipesworld-notankage (16)
psr-small (48)
rovers (7)
schedule (27)
storage (15)
tpp (6)
trucks-strips (9)

1.02
7.53
1.71
4.03
1.05
1.08
1.0
1.22
3.49
1.03
1.66
1.0
1.07
1.56
1.32

1.0
1.0
1.02
1.0
1.0
1.05
1.0
1.02
1.01
1.0
1.01
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

1.01
4.07
1.36
1.9
1.03
1.06
1.0
1.13
1.9
1.02
1.28
1.0
1.03
1.16
1.14

1.02
1.25
1.49
1.28
1.05
1.06
1.0
1.22
1.4
1.03
1.3
1.0
1.07
1.56
1.26

elevators-opt08-strips (18)
openstacks-opt08-strips (17)
parcprinter-08-strips (17)
pegsol-08-strips (27)
scanalyzer-08-strips (13)
sokoban-opt08-strips (25)
transport-opt08-strips (11)
woodworking-opt08-strips (13)

1.75
1.0
1.71
1.33
1.22
1.04
1.29
1.45

1.09
1.0
1.0
1.01
1.02
1.04
1.01
1.06

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

1.4
1.0
1.37
1.15
1.14
1.01
1.15
1.26

1.72
1.0
1.0
1.2
1.13
1.03
1.26
1.12

GEOMETRIC MEAN

1.66

1.01

1.0

1.35

1.2

Table 15: Detailed per-domain expansions relative to maxh using hLM-CUT and hLM-CUT+ . Each
row shows the geometric mean of the ratio of expanded nodes relative to maxh . Domains
are grouped into domains with unit cost actions and high variance in coverage, domains
with unit cost actions and low variance in coverage, and domains with non-uniform action
costs, respectively.

743

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

coverage

hLA

hLM-CUT

hLM-CUT+

maxh

rndh

selh

airport (33)
freecell (58)
logistics00 (21)
mprime (24)
mystery (17)
pipesworld-tankage (13)
satellite (10)
zenotravel (13)

0.91 (30)
1.00 (58)
1.00 (21)
0.88 (21)
0.88 (15)
1.00 (13)
0.70 (7)
0.77 (10)

0.85 (28)
0.26 (15)
0.95 (20)
1.00 (24)
1.00 (17)
0.92 (12)
0.70 (7)
1.00 (13)

0.94 (31)
0.22 (13)
0.81 (17)
1.00 (24)
1.00 (17)
0.69 (9)
0.90 (9)
0.92 (12)

0.94 (31)
0.53 (31)
0.76 (16)
1.00 (24)
1.00 (17)
0.69 (9)
0.90 (9)
0.92 (12)

0.79 (26)
0.26 (15)
0.95 (20)
0.75 (18)
0.71 (12)
0.69 (9)
0.70 (7)
0.69 (9)

0.91 (30)
0.57 (33)
0.95 (20)
0.96 (23)
1.00 (17)
0.85 (11)
0.80 (8)
0.92 (12)

blocks (28)
depot (7)
driverlog (14)
grid (3)
gripper (7)
logistics98 (6)
miconic (142)
pathways (5)
pipesworld-notankage (18)
psr-small (49)
rovers (8)
schedule (30)
storage (15)
tpp (6)
trucks-strips (10)

0.96 (27)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
1.00 (3)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (142)
0.80 (4)
1.00 (18)
1.00 (49)
1.00 (8)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
0.93 (13)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
0.99 (141)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
1.00 (49)
0.88 (7)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (10)

0.96 (27)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
0.67 (2)
0.86 (6)
1.00 (6)
0.99 (140)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
0.98 (48)
0.88 (7)
0.90 (27)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

0.96 (27)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
0.67 (2)
0.71 (5)
1.00 (6)
0.99 (140)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
0.98 (48)
0.88 (7)
0.90 (27)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

0.96 (27)
1.00 (7)
0.93 (13)
0.67 (2)
0.86 (6)
0.83 (5)
0.99 (140)
0.80 (4)
0.83 (15)
0.98 (48)
0.88 (7)
0.93 (28)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
0.93 (13)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (142)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
1.00 (49)
1.00 (8)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (10)

elevators-opt08-strips (22)
openstacks-opt08-strips (20)
parcprinter-08-strips (22)
pegsol-08-strips (28)
scanalyzer-08-strips (16)
sokoban-opt08-strips (30)
transport-opt08-strips (12)
woodworking-opt08-strips (19)

0.77 (17)
0.90 (18)
0.68 (15)
0.96 (27)
0.56 (9)
0.83 (25)
1.00 (12)
0.68 (13)

1.00 (22)
1.00 (20)
0.82 (18)
1.00 (28)
0.94 (15)
1.00 (30)
0.92 (11)
0.84 (16)

0.82 (18)
0.85 (17)
0.95 (21)
0.96 (27)
0.81 (13)
0.83 (25)
0.92 (11)
0.74 (14)

0.82 (18)
0.80 (16)
0.95 (21)
0.96 (27)
0.81 (13)
0.77 (23)
0.92 (11)
0.79 (15)

0.64 (14)
0.90 (18)
0.59 (13)
0.96 (27)
0.38 (6)
0.90 (27)
0.92 (11)
0.74 (14)

0.95 (21)
0.80 (16)
0.86 (19)
0.96 (27)
0.94 (15)
0.87 (26)
0.92 (11)
0.79 (15)

TOTAL

0.91 (656)

0.92 (639)

0.89 (614)

0.89 (628)

0.81 (578)

0.92 (649)

Table 16: Detailed per-domain normalized coverage using hLA , hLM-CUT and hLM-CUT+ . Each line
shows the normalized coverage in each domain, with the number of problems solved is
shown in parentheses. Domains are grouped into domains with unit cost actions and high
variance in coverage, domains with unit cost actions and low variance in coverage, and
domains with non-uniform action costs, respectively.

744

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

expansions

hLA

hLM-CUT

hLM-CUT+

maxh

rndh

selh

airport (26)
freecell (13)
logistics00 (16)
mprime (18)
mystery (13)
pipesworld-tankage (9)
satellite (7)
zenotravel (9)

2.29
1.22
1.0
9.21
7.85
2.68
18.81
7.26

1.16
417.8
1.0
2.74
1.41
5.08
3.78
1.23

1.0
47.65
1.0
1.21
1.13
1.38
1.01
1.1

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

1.04
45.83
1.0
4.26
4.48
2.27
4.53
3.07

1.71
6.73
1.0
1.99
1.43
1.93
2.45
2.45

blocks (27)
depot (7)
driverlog (13)
grid (2)
gripper (5)
logistics98 (5)
miconic (140)
pathways (4)
pipesworld-notankage (15)
psr-small (48)
rovers (7)
schedule (27)
storage (15)
tpp (6)
trucks-strips (9)

7.59
19.63
11.36
5.04
1.0
6.43
1.0
40.63
3.09
1.31
2.77
1.09
2.3
2.73
60.39

1.02
7.53
1.73
4.06
1.06
1.08
1.0
1.02
4.29
1.03
1.67
1.0
1.07
1.56
1.33

1.0
1.01
1.03
1.01
1.0
1.05
1.0
1.0
1.13
1.0
1.01
1.0
1.01
1.0
1.01

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

1.58
5.22
2.79
2.15
1.02
1.79
1.0
7.76
2.35
1.1
1.78
0.99
1.33
1.91
6.05

1.67
2.46
2.03
4.91
1.0
1.58
1.0
1.0
2.53
1.24
1.38
1.09
1.58
1.41
1.33

elevators-opt08-strips (14)
openstacks-opt08-strips (16)
parcprinter-08-strips (13)
pegsol-08-strips (27)
scanalyzer-08-strips (6)
sokoban-opt08-strips (21)
transport-opt08-strips (11)
woodworking-opt08-strips (11)

33.16
1.17
45.31
4.94
24.13
16.43
15.5
53.33

1.65
1.0
2.02
1.34
1.5
1.03
1.29
1.37

1.1
1.0
1.0
1.01
1.05
1.05
1.01
1.0

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

4.65
1.03
5.91
1.69
5.5
1.14
2.66
4.02

2.9
1.07
1.0
1.26
1.87
1.13
1.82
1.63

GEOMETRIC MEAN

6.1

1.91

1.18

1.0

2.56

1.67

Table 17: Detailed per-domain expansions relative to maxh using hLA , hLM-CUT and hLM-CUT+ .
Each row shows the geometric mean of the ratio of expanded nodes relative to maxh .
Domains are grouped into domains with unit cost actions and high variance in coverage,
domains with unit cost actions and low variance in coverage, and domains with nonuniform action costs, respectively.

745

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

overhead

hLA /hLM-CUT

hLA /hLM-CUT+

hLM-CUT /hLM-CUT+

All Three

airport (28)
freecell (13)
logistics00 (20)
mprime (23)
mystery (17)
pipesworld-tankage (9)
satellite (7)
zenotravel (12)
blocks (26)
depot (7)
driverlog (13)
grid (2)
gripper (7)
logistics98 (6)
miconic (141)
pathways (5)
pipesworld-notankage (17)
psr-small (49)
rovers (7)
schedule (30)
storage (15)
tpp (6)
trucks-strips (9)
elevators-opt08-strips (16)
openstacks-opt08-strips (16)
parcprinter-08-strips (18)
pegsol-08-strips (27)
scanalyzer-08-strips (13)
sokoban-opt08-strips (24)
transport-opt08-strips (11)
woodworking-opt08-strips (14)

4%
4%
8%
7%
3%
11%
14%
15%
21%
45%
29%
26%
13%
15%
1%
5%
22%
8%
15%
13%
18%
2%
3%
32%
15%
2%
9%
2%
5%
12%
5%

7%
8%
7%
7%
3%
11%
18%
35%
35%
29%
45%
17%
13%
31%
4%
1%
17%
11%
24%
13%
12%
1%
2%
75%
9%
6%
2%
4%
2%
23%
5%

1%
13%
2%
6%
8%
10%
10%
26%
2%
14%
26%
1%
5%
6%
3%
4%
20%
3%
26%
5%
2%
2%
12%
8%
10%
1%
28%
10%
14%
7%
2%

9%
1%
6%
3%
2%
5%
8%
21%
5%
10%
21%
6%
22%
5%
4%
7%
22%
12%
19%
24%
10%
3%
7%
9%
23%
5%
15%
1%
7%
3%
4%

AVERAGE

12%

15%

9%

10%

Table 18: Selective max overhead. Each row lists the average percentage of time spent on learning
and classification, out of the total time taken by selective max, in each domain, for each
set of heuristics. Domains are grouped into domains with unit cost actions and high
variance in coverage, domains with unit cost actions and low variance in coverage, and
domains with non-uniform action costs, respectively.

746

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

coverage
airport (50)
freecell (80)
logistics00 (28)
mprime (35)
mystery (30)
pipesworld-tankage (50)
satellite (36)
zenotravel (20)
SUM

sel=0.1
h
30
49
21
24
17
12
8
13
174

sel=0.5
h
30
49
21
24
17
12
8
13
174

sel=1
h
30
49
21
24
17
12
8
13
174

sel=1.5
h
30
49
21
24
17
12
8
13
174

sel=2
h
30
49
21
22
17
12
7
12
170

sel=3
h
30
49
21
23
16
12
7
11
169

sel=4
h
30
49
21
21
15
13
7
10
166

sel=5
h
30
49
21
21
15
13
7
10
166

Table 19: Number of problems solved by selective max in each domain with varying values of
hyper-parameter 

coverage
airport (50)
freecell (80)
logistics00 (28)
mprime (35)
mystery (30)
pipesworld-tankage (50)
satellite (36)
zenotravel (20)
SUM

sel=0.51
h
30
48
21
24
17
12
8
13
173

sel=0.6
h
30
49
21
24
17
12
8
13
174

sel=0.7
h
30
49
21
24
17
12
8
13
174

sel=0.8
h
30
49
21
24
17
12
8
13
174

sel=0.9
h
30
49
21
24
17
12
8
13
174

sel=0.99
h
30
49
21
24
17
12
8
13
174

Table 20: Number of problems solved by selective max in each domain with varying values of
confidence threshold 

Table 18 lists the average overhead of selective max in each domain, for each combination of
two or more heuristics.
Tables 19, 20, 21, 22 and 23 list the number of problems solved in each domain, under various
values for , , N , sampling method and classifier, respectively.

coverage
airport (50)
freecell (80)
logistics00 (28)
mprime (35)
mystery (30)
pipesworld-tankage (50)
satellite (36)
zenotravel (20)
SUM

=10
selN
h
30
47
21
24
17
12
8
13
172

=100
selN
h
30
49
21
24
17
12
8
13
174

=1000
selN
h
30
46
21
24
17
12
8
13
171

Table 21: Number of problems solved by selective max in each domain with varying values of
initial Sample Size N

747

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

coverage
airport (50)
freecell (80)
logistics00 (28)
mprime (35)
mystery (30)
pipesworld-tankage (50)
satellite (36)
zenotravel (20)
SUM

selPDB
h
30
49
21
24
17
12
8
13
174

selP
h
30
53
21
24
17
12
8
13
178

P
selU
h
30
55
21
24
17
12
8
13
180

Table 22: Number of problems solved by selective max in each domain with different sampling
methods. PDB is the sampling method of Haslum et al. (2007), P is the biased probes
sampling method, and U P is the unbiased probes sampling method.

coverage
airport (50)
freecell (80)
logistics00 (28)
mprime (35)
mystery (30)
pipesworld-tankage (50)
satellite (36)
zenotravel (20)
SUM

B
selN
h
30
49
21
24
17
12
8
13
174

selAODE
h
25
49
20
24
17
12
8
13
168

I
selIT
h
30
34
20
24
17
12
7
12
156

N
sel3N
h
30
35
20
24
17
12
7
13
158

N
sel5N
h
28
46
20
23
17
10
6
11
161

Table 23: Number of problems solved by selective max in each domain with different classifiers

748

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

coverage

selh

portint

portctr

airport (33)
freecell (58)
logistics00 (21)
mprime (24)
mystery (17)
pipesworld-tankage (13)
satellite (10)
zenotravel (13)

0.91 (30)
0.84 (49)
1.00 (21)
1.00 (24)
1.00 (17)
0.92 (12)
0.80 (8)
1.00 (13)

0.91 (30)
0.91 (53)
0.95 (20)
0.96 (23)
1.12 (19)
0.92 (12)
0.70 (7)
0.92 (12)

0.91 (30)
0.93 (54)
1.00 (21)
0.96 (23)
1.24 (21)
1.00 (13)
0.70 (7)
0.92 (12)

blocks (28)
depot (7)
driverlog (14)
grid (3)
gripper (7)
logistics98 (6)
miconic (142)
pathways (5)
pipesworld-notankage (18)
psr-small (49)
rovers (8)
schedule (30)
storage (15)
tpp (6)
trucks-strips (10)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (142)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
1.00 (49)
1.00 (8)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (10)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (142)
1.00 (5)
1.00 (18)
1.00 (49)
1.00 (8)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (142)
1.00 (5)
1.00 (18)
1.00 (49)
1.00 (8)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (10)

elevators-opt08-strips (22)
openstacks-opt08-strips (20)
parcprinter-08-strips (22)
pegsol-08-strips (28)
scanalyzer-08-strips (16)
sokoban-opt08-strips (30)
transport-opt08-strips (12)
woodworking-opt08-strips (19)

1.00 (22)
0.90 (18)
0.82 (18)
0.96 (27)
0.94 (15)
0.97 (29)
0.92 (11)
0.89 (17)

0.82 (18)
0.90 (18)
0.82 (18)
0.96 (27)
0.81 (13)
0.97 (29)
0.92 (11)
0.84 (16)

0.86 (19)
0.95 (19)
0.82 (18)
0.96 (27)
1.00 (16)
0.97 (29)
1.00 (12)
0.89 (17)

TOTAL

0.95 (677)

0.94 (672)

0.96 (685)

Table 24: Detailed coverage of portfolio using hLA / hLM-CUT . Number of problems solved by selective max (selh ), a simulated interruptible portfolio (portint ), and a simulated contract
anytime portfolio (portctr ) in each domain using heuristics hLA / hLM-CUT . Domains are
grouped into domains with unit cost actions and high variance in coverage, domains with
unit cost actions and low variance in coverage, and domains with non-uniform action
costs, respectively.

749

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

coverage

selh

portint

portctr

airport (33)
freecell (58)
logistics00 (21)
mprime (24)
mystery (17)
pipesworld-tankage (13)
satellite (10)
zenotravel (13)

0.91 (30)
0.71 (41)
1.00 (21)
1.00 (24)
1.00 (17)
0.69 (9)
1.00 (10)
0.92 (12)

0.91 (30)
0.91 (53)
0.95 (20)
1.00 (24)
1.12 (19)
0.92 (12)
0.80 (8)
0.85 (11)

0.91 (30)
0.93 (54)
1.00 (21)
1.00 (24)
1.18 (20)
1.00 (13)
0.80 (8)
0.85 (11)

blocks (28)
depot (7)
driverlog (14)
grid (3)
gripper (7)
logistics98 (6)
miconic (142)
pathways (5)
pipesworld-notankage (18)
psr-small (49)
rovers (8)
schedule (30)
storage (15)
tpp (6)
trucks-strips (10)

0.93 (26)
1.00 (7)
0.93 (13)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (142)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
1.00 (49)
1.00 (8)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

0.93 (26)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (142)
1.00 (5)
1.00 (18)
1.00 (49)
1.00 (8)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.70 (7)

0.96 (27)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (142)
1.00 (5)
1.00 (18)
1.00 (49)
1.00 (8)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.80 (8)

elevators-opt08-strips (22)
openstacks-opt08-strips (20)
parcprinter-08-strips (22)
pegsol-08-strips (28)
scanalyzer-08-strips (16)
sokoban-opt08-strips (30)
transport-opt08-strips (12)
woodworking-opt08-strips (19)

0.73 (16)
0.85 (17)
1.00 (22)
0.96 (27)
0.81 (13)
0.80 (24)
0.92 (11)
0.79 (15)

0.82 (18)
0.85 (17)
1.00 (22)
0.96 (27)
0.75 (12)
0.83 (25)
0.92 (11)
0.79 (15)

0.82 (18)
0.85 (17)
1.00 (22)
0.96 (27)
0.94 (15)
0.83 (25)
1.00 (12)
0.79 (15)

TOTAL

0.92 (651)

0.93 (666)

0.94 (676)

Table 25: Detailed coverage of portfolio using hLA / hLM-CUT+ . Number of problems solved by selective max (selh ), a simulated interruptible portfolio (portint ), and a simulated contract
anytime portfolio (portctr ) in each domain using heuristics hLA / hLM-CUT+ . Domains
are grouped into domains with unit cost actions and high variance in coverage, domains
with unit cost actions and low variance in coverage, and domains with non-uniform action
costs, respectively.

750

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

coverage

selh

portint

portctr

airport (33)
freecell (58)
logistics00 (21)
mprime (24)
mystery (17)
pipesworld-tankage (13)
satellite (10)
zenotravel (13)

0.85 (28)
0.22 (13)
0.95 (20)
1.00 (24)
0.94 (16)
0.69 (9)
0.80 (8)
0.92 (12)

0.88 (29)
0.24 (14)
0.95 (20)
1.00 (24)
1.18 (20)
0.69 (9)
0.80 (8)
0.92 (12)

0.88 (29)
0.26 (15)
0.95 (20)
1.00 (24)
1.24 (21)
0.85 (11)
0.80 (8)
0.92 (12)

blocks (28)
depot (7)
driverlog (14)
grid (3)
gripper (7)
logistics98 (6)
miconic (142)
pathways (5)
pipesworld-notankage (18)
psr-small (49)
rovers (8)
schedule (30)
storage (15)
tpp (6)
trucks-strips (10)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
0.99 (141)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
1.00 (49)
0.88 (7)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (10)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
0.93 (13)
0.67 (2)
0.86 (6)
1.00 (6)
0.99 (140)
1.00 (5)
0.89 (16)
1.00 (49)
0.88 (7)
0.93 (28)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
0.93 (13)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
0.99 (141)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
1.00 (49)
0.88 (7)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (10)

elevators-opt08-strips (22)
openstacks-opt08-strips (20)
parcprinter-08-strips (22)
pegsol-08-strips (28)
scanalyzer-08-strips (16)
sokoban-opt08-strips (30)
transport-opt08-strips (12)
woodworking-opt08-strips (19)

0.95 (21)
0.95 (19)
0.91 (20)
0.96 (27)
0.94 (15)
0.83 (25)
0.92 (11)
0.95 (18)

0.82 (18)
0.90 (18)
1.00 (22)
0.96 (27)
0.81 (13)
0.93 (28)
0.92 (11)
0.79 (15)

0.86 (19)
0.95 (19)
1.00 (22)
0.96 (27)
0.94 (15)
0.93 (28)
0.92 (11)
0.84 (16)

TOTAL

0.91 (630)

0.90 (625)

0.93 (640)

Table 26: Detailed coverage of portfolio using hLM-CUT / hLM-CUT+ . Number of problems solved
by selective max (selh ), a simulated interruptible portfolio (portint ), and a simulated
contract anytime portfolio (portctr ) in each domain using heuristics hLM-CUT / hLM-CUT+ .
Domains are grouped into domains with unit cost actions and high variance in coverage,
domains with unit cost actions and low variance in coverage, and domains with nonuniform action costs, respectively.

751

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

coverage

selh

portint

portctr

airport (33)
freecell (58)
logistics00 (21)
mprime (24)
mystery (17)
pipesworld-tankage (13)
satellite (10)
zenotravel (13)

0.91 (30)
0.57 (33)
0.95 (20)
0.96 (23)
1.00 (17)
0.85 (11)
0.80 (8)
0.92 (12)

0.91 (30)
0.91 (53)
0.95 (20)
1.00 (24)
1.18 (20)
0.92 (12)
0.80 (8)
0.92 (12)

0.91 (30)
0.93 (54)
1.00 (21)
1.00 (24)
1.18 (20)
0.92 (12)
0.80 (8)
0.92 (12)

blocks (28)
depot (7)
driverlog (14)
grid (3)
gripper (7)
logistics98 (6)
miconic (142)
pathways (5)
pipesworld-notankage (18)
psr-small (49)
rovers (8)
schedule (30)
storage (15)
tpp (6)
trucks-strips (10)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
0.93 (13)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (142)
1.00 (5)
0.94 (17)
1.00 (49)
1.00 (8)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (10)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (142)
1.00 (5)
1.00 (18)
1.00 (49)
1.00 (8)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

1.00 (28)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (14)
0.67 (2)
1.00 (7)
1.00 (6)
1.00 (142)
1.00 (5)
1.00 (18)
1.00 (49)
1.00 (8)
1.00 (30)
1.00 (15)
1.00 (6)
0.90 (9)

elevators-opt08-strips (22)
openstacks-opt08-strips (20)
parcprinter-08-strips (22)
pegsol-08-strips (28)
scanalyzer-08-strips (16)
sokoban-opt08-strips (30)
transport-opt08-strips (12)
woodworking-opt08-strips (19)

0.95 (21)
0.80 (16)
0.86 (19)
0.96 (27)
0.94 (15)
0.87 (26)
0.92 (11)
0.79 (15)

0.82 (18)
0.90 (18)
1.00 (22)
0.96 (27)
0.81 (13)
0.97 (29)
0.92 (11)
0.84 (16)

0.86 (19)
0.95 (19)
1.00 (22)
0.96 (27)
0.81 (13)
0.97 (29)
0.92 (11)
0.89 (17)

TOTAL

0.92 (649)

0.95 (679)

0.95 (684)

Table 27: Detailed coverage of portfolio using hLA / hLM-CUT / hLM-CUT+ . Number of problems
solved by selective max (selh ), a simulated interruptible portfolio (portint ), and a simulated contract anytime portfolio (portctr ) in each domain using heuristics hLA / hLM-CUT
/ hLM-CUT+ . Domains are grouped into domains with unit cost actions and high variance
in coverage, domains with unit cost actions and low variance in coverage, and domains
with non-uniform action costs, respectively.

Tables 24, 25, 26 and 27 list the normalized coverage in each domain for selective max, and for
the simulated contract and interruptible sequential portfolios.

References
Arfaee, S. J., Zilles, S., & Holte, R. C. (2010). Bootstrap learning of heuristic functions. In Felner,
A., & Sturtevant, N. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Third Annual Symposium on Combinatorial
Search (SoCS 2010), pp. 5260. AAAI Press.
Backstrom, C., & Klein, I. (1991). Planning in polynomial time: the SAS-PUBS class. Computational Intelligence, 7(3), 181197.
Backstrom, C., & Nebel, B. (1995). Complexity results for SAS+ planning. Computational Intelligence, 11(4), 625655.
Bayardo Jr., R. J., & Schrag, R. (1997). Using CSP look-back techniques to solve real-world SAT
instances. In Kuipers, B., & Webber, B. L. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Fourteenth National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 1997), pp. 203208. AAAI Press.
752

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

Bonet, B., & Helmert, M. (2010). Strengthening landmark heuristics via hitting sets. In Coelho,
H., Studer, R., & Wooldridge, M. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 19th European Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (ECAI 2010), pp. 329334. IOS Press.
Bonet, B., Loerincs, G., & Geffner, H. (1997). A robust and fast action selection mechanism for
planning. In Kuipers, B., & Webber, B. L. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Fourteenth National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 1997), pp. 714719. AAAI Press.
Botea, A., Enzenberger, M., Muller, M., & Schaeffer, J. (2005). Macro-FF: Improving AI planning
with automatically learned macro-operators. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 24,
581621.
Brafman, R., & Shani, G. (2012). A multi-path compilation approach to contingent planning. In
Hoffmann, J., & Selman, B. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2012), pp. 915. AAAI Press.
Burke, E., Kendall, G., Newall, J., Hart, E., Ross, P., & Schulenburg, S. (2003). Hyper-Heuristics:
An Emerging Direction in Modern Search Technology. In Handbook of Metaheuristics, International Series in Operations Research & Management Science, chap. 16, pp. 457474.
Coles, A., & Smith, A. (2007). Marvin: A heuristic search planner with online macro-action learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 28, 119156.
Cover, T. M., & Hart, P. E. (1967). Nearest neighbor pattern classification. IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, 13(1), 21  27.
de la Rosa, T., Jimenez, S., & Borrajo, D. (2008). Learning relational decision trees for guiding
heuristic planning. In Rintanen, J., Nebel, B., Beck, J. C., & Hansen, E. (Eds.), Proceedings
of the Eighteenth International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS
2008), pp. 6067. AAAI Press.
Domshlak, C., Karpas, E., & Markovitch, S. (2010). To max or not to max: Online learning for
speeding up optimal planning. In Fox, M., & Poole, D. (Eds.), Proceedings of the TwentyFourth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2010), pp. 10711076. AAAI Press.
Fern, A. (2010). Speedup learning. In Sammut, C., & Webb, G. I. (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Machine
Learning, pp. 907911. Springer.
Fern, A., Khardon, R., & Tadepalli, P. (2011). The first learning track of the international planning
competition. Machine Learning, 84(1-2), 81107.
Fikes, R. E., Hart, P. E., & Nilsson, N. J. (1972). Learning and executing generalized robot plans.
Artificial Intelligence, 3, 251288.
Fikes, R. E., & Nilsson, N. J. (1971). STRIPS: A new approach to the application of theorem
proving to problem solving. Artificial Intelligence, 2, 189208.
Finkelstein, L., & Markovitch, S. (1998). A selective macro-learning algorithm and its application
to the NxN sliding-tile puzzle. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 8, 223263.
Garca-Olaya, A., Jimenez, S., & Linares Lopez, C. (2011). The 2011 international planning competition. Tech. rep., Universidad Carlos III de Madrid. http://hdl.handle.net/10016/11710.
Geffner, H. (2010). The model-based approach to autonomous behavior: A personal view. In Fox,
M., & Poole, D. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI 2010), pp. 17091712. AAAI Press.
753

fiD OMSHLAK , K ARPAS , & M ARKOVITCH

Haslum, P., Botea, A., Helmert, M., Bonet, B., & Koenig, S. (2007). Domain-independent construction of pattern database heuristics for cost-optimal planning. In Holte, R. C., & Howe, A. E.
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI
2007), pp. 10071012. AAAI Press.
Helmert, M. (2006). The Fast Downward planning system. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 26, 191246.
Helmert, M., & Domshlak, C. (2009). Landmarks, critical paths and abstractions: Whats the difference anyway?. In Gerevini, A., Howe, A., Cesta, A., & Refanidis, I. (Eds.), Proceedings
of the Nineteenth International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS
2009), pp. 162169. AAAI Press.
Helmert, M., Haslum, P., & Hoffmann, J. (2007). Flexible abstraction heuristics for optimal sequential planning. In Boddy, M., Fox, M., & Thiebaux, S. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Seventeenth
International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS 2007), pp. 176
183. AAAI Press.
Helmert, M., & Roger, G. (2008). How good is almost perfect?. In Fox, D., & Gomes, C. P. (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2008), pp.
944949. AAAI Press.
Helmert, M., Roger, G., & Karpas, E. (2011). Fast Downward Stone Soup: A baseline for building
planner portfolios. In ICAPS 2011 Workshop on Planning and Learning, pp. 2835.
Hoffmann, J., & Nebel, B. (2001). The FF planning system: Fast plan generation through heuristic
search. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 14, 253302.
Hutter, F., Hoos, H. H., Leyton-Brown, K., & Stutzle, T. (2009). ParamILS: An automatic algorithm
configuration framework. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 36, 267306.
Karpas, E., & Domshlak, C. (2009). Cost-optimal planning with landmarks. In Boutilier, C.
(Ed.), Proceedings of the 21st International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI 2009), pp. 17281733.
Katz, M., & Domshlak, C. (2010). Implicit abstraction heuristics. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
Research, 39, 51126.
Kautz, H., & Selman, B. (1992). Planning as satisfiability. In Neumann, B. (Ed.), Proceedings of the
10th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence (ECAI 1992), pp. 359363. John Wiley
and Sons.
Keyder, E., & Geffner, H. (2009). Soft goals can be compiled away. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
Research, 36, 547556.
Marques-Silva, J. P., & Sakallah, K. A. (1996). GRASP - a new search algorithm for satisfiability.
In Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design
(ICCAD 1996), pp. 220227.
Minton, S. (1994). Machine Learning Methods for Planning. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Nissim, R., Hoffmann, J., & Helmert, M. (2011). Computing perfect heuristics in polynomial time:
On bisimulation and merge-and-shrink abstraction in optimal planning. In Walsh, T. (Ed.),
Proceedings of the 22nd International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI11),
pp. 19831990. AAAI Press/IJCAI.
754

fiO NLINE S PEEDUP L EARNING FOR O PTIMAL P LANNING

Palacios, H., & Geffner, H. (2009). Compiling uncertainty away in conformant planning problems
with bounded width. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 35, 623675.
Pearl, J. (1984). Heuristics: Intelligent Search Strategies for Computer Problem Solving. AddisonWesley.
Pednault, E. P. D. (1989). ADL: Exploring the middle ground between STRIPS and the situation
calculus. In Brachman, R. J., Levesque, H. J., & Reiter, R. (Eds.), Proceedings of the First
International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR
1989), pp. 324332. Morgan Kaufmann.
Rendell, L. A. (1983). A new basis for state-space learning systems and a successful implementation. Artificial Intelligence, 20(4), 369392.
Rintanen, J., Heljanko, K., & Niemela, I. (2006). Planning as satisfiability: Parallel plans and algorithms for plan search. Artificial Intelligence, 170(1213), 10311080.
Russell, S. J., & Zilberstein, S. (1991). Composing real-time systems. In Mylopoulos, J., & Reiter,
R. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 12th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(IJCAI 1991), pp. 212217. Morgan Kaufmann.
Schiex, T., & Verfaillie, G. (1993). Nogood recording for static and dynamic constraint satisfaction
problems. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 3, 4855.
Thayer, J. T., Dionne, A. J., & Ruml, W. (2011). Learning inadmissible heuristics during search. In
Bacchus, F., Domshlak, C., Edelkamp, S., & Helmert, M. (Eds.), Proceedings of the TwentyFirst International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS 2011), pp.
250257. AAAI Press.
Utgoff, P. E., Berkman, N. C., & Clouse, J. A. (1997). Decision tree induction based on efficient
tree restructuring. Machine Learning, 29(1), 544.
Webb, G. I., Boughton, J. R., & Wang, Z. (2005). Not so naive Bayes: Aggregating one-dependence
estimators. Machine Learning, 58(1), 524.
Yoon, S., Fern, A., & Givan, R. (2007). FF-Replan: A baseline for probabilistic planning. In Boddy,
M., Fox, M., & Thiebaux, S. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Seventeenth International Conference
on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS 2007), pp. 352359. AAAI Press.
Yoon, S., Fern, A., & Givan, R. (2008). Learning control knowledge for forward search planning.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9, 683718.
Zimmerman, T., & Kambhampati, S. (2003). Learning-assisted automated planning: looking back,
taking stock, going forward. AI Magazine, 24, 7396.

755

fi