Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 57 (2016) 509-572

Submitted November, 2015; published November, 2016

A Survey of Computational Treatments of Biomolecules
by Robotics-Inspired Methods
Modeling Equilibrium Structure and Dynamics
Amarda Shehu

AMARDA @ GMU . EDU

Department of Computer Science, Department of Bioengineering,
School of Systems Biology
George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA

Erion Plaku

PLAKU @ CUA . EDU

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Catholic University of America, Washington, DC, USA

Abstract
More than fifty years of research in molecular biology have demonstrated that the ability of
small and large molecules to interact with one another and propagate the cellular processes in the
living cell lies in the ability of these molecules to assume and switch between specific structures
under physiological conditions. Elucidating biomolecular structure and dynamics at equilibrium
is therefore fundamental to furthering our understanding of biological function, molecular mechanisms in the cell, our own biology, disease, and disease treatments. By now, there is a wealth
of methods designed to elucidate biomolecular structure and dynamics contributed from diverse
scientific communities. In this survey, we focus on recent methods contributed from the Robotics
community that promise to address outstanding challenges regarding the disparate length and time
scales that characterize dynamic molecular processes in the cell. In particular, we survey roboticsinspired methods designed to obtain efficient representations of structure spaces of molecules in isolation or in assemblies for the purpose of characterizing equilibrium structure and dynamics. While
an exhaustive review is an impossible endeavor, this survey balances the description of important
algorithmic contributions with a critical discussion of outstanding computational challenges. The
objective is to spur further research to address outstanding challenges in modeling equilibrium
biomolecular structure and dynamics.

1. Introduction
The way in which the chain of amino acid units in a protein molecule is coiled and folded in space
has been worked out for the first time. The protein is myoglobin, the molecule of which contains
2,600 atoms. This is how John Kendrew began his feature article in Scientific American in 1961,
reporting what was the first atomistic model of a protein structure1 obtained via X-ray crystallography (Kendrew, Dickerson, Strandberg, Hart, Davies, Phillips, & Shore, 1960). This model is drawn
in various graphical representations in Figure 1. For the pioneering work on resolving structures of
globular proteins, Kendrew and Perutz were awarded the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1962. This was
the very same year Watson, Crick, and Wilkins shared the Nobel Prize in physiology or medicine
for using X-ray crystallography data to determine the helical structure of DNA.
1. For the purpose of this survey, we will distinguish between structure and conformation. Structure will refer to a
specific placement of the atoms that comprise a biomolecule in R3 . The concept of conformation is defined in
Section 2.
c
2016
AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

(a) X-ray model of myoglobin and heme group

(b) Model in atomistic detail (no heme group)

(c) Various models of myoglobin and heme group
Figure 1: (a) The X-ray model of myoglobin and the heme group bound to it determined by Kendrew are
drawn here with the Visual Molecular Dynamics (VMD) software (Humphrey et al., 1996). The model can be
found in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (Berman et al., 2003), which is a repository of known protein structures,
under PDB entry 1MBN. Drawing the surface of this protein facilitates visually locating the cavity where the
heme group, which helps myoglobin to carry off oxygen to tissue, binds. The heme group is drawn in a
ball-and-stick representation in red. (b) All heavy atoms that comprise the 153-amino acid long myoglobin
chain are drawn in a ball-and-stick representation, color-coded by the amino acid to which they belong. The
backbone that connects atoms of consecutive amino acids in the chain is drawn in white in the NewCartoon
representation in VMD. (c) The X-ray model of myoglobin under PDB entry 1MBN is superimposed over the 12
models obtained for the same protein and the bound heme group from Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR),
deposited in the PDB under PDB entry 1MYF.

The ability to visualize structures of biomolecules in atomistic detail was a shot in the arm to
molecular biology and marked the beginning of a revolution in molecular structural biology; a race
soon ensued across wet laboratories to determine three-dimensional (3d) structures assumed by proteins and other biomolecules under physiological conditions. Since those early days, the set of protein structures resolved in the wet-laboratory, beginning with myoglobin and lysozyme (Kendrew,
Bodo, Dintzis, Parrish, Wyckoff, & Phillips, 1958; Kendrew et al., 1960; Phillips, 1967), has grown
510

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

to over a hundred thousand, now freely available for anyone to download from the PDB (Berman
et al., 2003).
Further pioneering work by Anfinsen, which earned him the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1973,
demonstrated that the ability of a protein to carry out its biological function is dependent on its
ability to fold onto a specific 3d structure reversibly (Anfinsen, 1973). The Anfinsen experiments
led to the view that a folded structure corresponds to the global minimum of an underlying energy
surface. They also showed that the information needed for a protein to assume its 3d, biologicallyactive structure is largely encoded in its amino-acid sequence. Since then, any study of biomolecular
function has to consider the role of both sequence and structure (Fersht, 1999).
Figure 1(a), which shows the surface of the biologically-active structure of the myoglobin protein, exposes a central cavity that allows binding of the heme group to myoglobin. Figure 1(b)
traces the amino-acid chain that makes up myoglobin and additionally draws the heavy atoms constituting each amino acid in this protein. These simple images illustrate two important points: first,
that structure plays a central role in function (specifically, complementary geometric and physicochemical features of 3d structures of molecules are key to stable molecular interactions) (Boehr &
Wright, 2008); second, that the ability of the amino-acid chain to fold onto itself makes protein
structures complex. Understanding how and what biologically-active structure a biomolecule assumes in the cell is key not only to elucidating molecular mechanisms in the healthy and diseased
cell, but also determining how to address the abnormal role of a biomolecule in such mechanisms
in order to treat disease. In particular, research has shown that many abnormalities involve proteins with aberrant biological function (Soto, 2008; Uversky, 2009; Fernandez-Medarde & Santos,
2011; Neudecker, Robustelli, Cavalli, Walsh, Lundstrm, Zarrine-Afsar, Sharpe, Vendruscolo, &
Kay, 2012) due to external and internal perturbations (e.g., DNA mutations, copying errors) affecting the ability of these molecules to assume specific structures (Onuchic, Luthey-Schulten, &
Wolynes, 1997; Ozenne, Schneider, Yao, Huang, Salmon, Zweckstetter, Jensen, & Blackledge,
2012; Levy, Jortner, & Becker, 2001; Miao, Sinko, Pierce, Bucher, Walker, & McCammon, 2014;
Gorfe, Grant, & McCammon, 2008; Grant, Gorfe, & McCammon, 2009).
Any treatment of the relationship between structure and function would be incomplete if the
dynamic personality of biomolecules is not taken into account (Jenzler-Wildman & Kern, 2007).
While X-ray models of biomolecular structures seem to suggest rigid molecules with atoms frozen
in space, an increasing number of wet-laboratory, theoretical, and computational studies have shown
that biomolecules are systems of particles in perpetual motion. Indeed, Feynman taught early about
the jiggling and wiggling of atoms (Feynman, Leighton, & Sands, 1963). Cooper and others later
posited that the inherent dynamics of biomolecules could be explained under a general, theoretical
treatment of molecules as thermodynamic systems striving towards their equilibrium, lowest freeenergy state (Cooper, 1984). Thus, the inherent dynamics of biomolecules could be explained
using fundamental physics principles; a statistical mechanics formulation also revealed the inherent
uncertainty at any given time about the particular state of a molecule (Cooper, 1984).
The dynamics of molecular systems was investigated around the same time the first experimental
models of protein structures were emerging. In 1967, Verlet simulated the dynamics of argon and
demonstrated that such simulations were able to reproduce equilibrium properties (Verlet, 1967).
Application of the Verlet algorithm for simulating protein dynamics would have to wait for one
more decade. In 1977, McCammon and Karplus reported on a 9.2 picosecond-long trajectory showing in-vacuum, atomistic fluctuations of the bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor around its folded,
active structure (the latter had already been obtained via wet-laboratory techniques) (McCammon,
511

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

Gelin, & Karplus, 1977). Advancements in wet-laboratory techniques, which had spewed about
a dozen models of biologically-active protein structures by the late 70s, facilitated a revolution in
computational structural biology. The pioneering algorithmic work of Verlet, Karplus, McCammon,
Levitt, Warshel, and Lifson (for which Karplus, Levitt, and Warshel shared the 2013 Nobel Prize
in chemistry) provided the earliest frameworks for computational treatments of biomolecules as a
means to investigate equilibrium structure and dynamics (Fersht, 2013).
Since those early days, advances in wet-laboratory techniques have proceeded hand in hand with
advancements in computational techniques, often feeding off each-other. The advent of NMR for
structure determination provided evidence of the ability of biomolecules to fluctuate between different structures even at equilibrium (Kay, 1998, 2005). Figure 1(c) shows, in addition to the X-ray
structure of myoglobin and its bound heme group, twelve models obtained via NMR, showcasing
the intrinsic flexibility of this important biomolecule and its molecular partner in the cell. Nowadays, wet-laboratory techniques, such as NMR and cryo-Electron Microscopy (cryo-EM) can resolve equilibrium structures and quantify equilibrium dynamics. For example, NMR has been used
to identify well-populated intermediate structures along a transition (Aden & Wolf-Watz, 2007).
Hybrid techniques that combine NMR relaxation measurements with X-ray models derived from
room-temperature crystallographic, single-molecule spectroscopy techniques that tune optical radiation to observe one molecule, and others can now elucidate fast and slow dynamic processes lasting
from a few picoseconds to a few milliseconds (Torella, Holden, Santoso, Hohlbein, & Kapanidis,
2011; Fenwick, van den Bedem, Fraser, & Wright, 2014; Karam, Powdrill, Liu, Vasquez, Mah,
Bernatchez, Gotte, & Cosa, 2014; Moerner & Fromm, 2003; Greenleaf, Woodside, & Block, 2007;
Michalet, Weiss, & Jager, 2006; Diekmann & Hoischen, 2014; Hohlbein, Craggs, & Cordes, 2014;
Schlau-Cohen, Wang, Southall, Cogdell, & Moerner, 2013; Moffat, 2003; Schotte, Lim, Jackson,
Smirnov, Soman, Olson, Phillips, Wulff, & Anfinrud, 2003; Roy, Hohng, & Ha, 2008; Fenwick
et al., 2014; Hohlbein et al., 2014; Lee, M., Kim, & Suh, 2013; Socher & Imperiali, 2013; Gall,
Ilioaia, Kruger, Novoderezhkin, Robert, & van Grondelle, 2015).
In particular, wet-laboratory techniques that employ fluorescence-based sensors, can provide
information on dynamic, biological events by effectively monitoring changes in the signals of
strategically-placed fluorophores (Socher & Imperiali, 2013). Depending on the placement of the
fluorophores, the binding of two molecular partners or the switch/transition of one molecule between different structures can be monitored in real time. While such techniques are very promising
and rapidly being adopted to study specific biological systems of interest, the reliance on fluorophores limits the generality of these techniques, as well as the structural detail that can be obtained. At the moment, wet-laboratory techniques obtain an incomplete view of equilibrium dynamics, as they are generally unable to span all the disparate length and time scales involved in
a structural transition of a molecule (Maximova, Moffatt, Ma, Nussinov, & Shehu, 2016); While
atomic motions occur on the picosecond scale, side-chain motions can take a few nanoseconds,
and concerted motions among groups of atoms facilitating structural rearrangements for molecular recognition events can take anywhere from a few microseconds to a few milliseconds (Shaw,
Maragakis, Lindorff-Larsen, Piana, Dror, Eastwood, Bank, Jumper, Salmon, Shan, & Wriggers,
2010; Lindorff-Larsen, Piana, Dror, & Shaw, 2011; Zagrovic, Snow, Shirts, & Pande, 2002; Piana, Lindorff-Larsen, & Shaw, 2012b); in extreme cases, binding of natural and drug molecules to
proteins occurs on the hours scale (Hoelder, Clarke, & Workman, 2012).
Computational treatments of biomolecules are driven by the promise of complementing wetlaboratory treatments in obtaining a comprehensive and detailed characterization of equilibrium
512

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

dynamics. The current most well-known frameworks employed in silico are Molecular Dynamics
(MD) (Verlet, 1967; McCammon et al., 1977) and Monte Carlo (MC) (Hastings, 1970; Metropolis,
Rosenbluth, Rosenbluth, Teller, & Teller, 1953). In principle, the entire equilibrium dynamics of
a molecule can be simulated by simply following the motions of the constitutive atoms along the
physical forces that atoms impose on one another. This is the foundation of the MD framework. In
contrast, in the MC framework, structural perturbation moves applied to atoms or bonds connecting
atoms are not the result of physical forces but instead design decisions. Different local search
strategies can be formulated to make use of such moves and iteratively explore neighborhoods in
the structure space of a biomolecule.
The scope and capabilities of MD- and MC-based treatments of biomolecules have been significantly increased due to improvements in hardware and parallel computation strategies. Specialized architectures, such as Anton, a supercomputer designed for MD simulations, (Piana, LindorffLarsen, Dirks, Salmon, Dror, & Shaw, 2012a; Piana et al., 2012b; Lindorff-Larsen et al., 2011),
GPUs (Stone, Phillips, Freddolino, Hardy, Trabuco, & Schulten, 2007; Harvey, Giupponi, & de
Fabritiis, 2009; Tanner, Phillips, & Schulten, 2012; Gotz, Williamson, Xu, Poole, Le Grand, &
Walker, 2012), and petascale national supercomputers, such as BlueWaters, Titan, Mira, and Stampede (Dubrow, 2015; Zhao, Perilla, Yufenyuy, Meng, Chen, Ning, Ahn, Gronenborn, Schulten,
Aiken, & Zhang, 2013) have allowed characterizing biomolecular structure and dynamics up to the
microsecond time scale. Algorithmic improvements in dynamic load balancing (Fattebert, Richards,
& Glosli, 2012), neighbor searches (Proctor, Lipscomb, Zou, Anderson, & Cho, 2012), and optimal force splitting (Batcho, Case, & Schlick, 2001) allow effectively distributing the simulation of
the dynamics of molecular systems comprised of billions of particles (Perilla, Goh, Cassidy, Liu,
Bernardi, Rudack, Yu, Wu, & Schulten, 2015).
In principle, a full account of the equilibrium dynamics of a biomolecule requires a comprehensive characterization of both the structure space available to the biomolecule at equilibrium as well
as the underlying energy surface that governs accessibility of structures and transitions between
structures at equilibrium. This remains challenging to do via MD and MC-based frameworks, and
algorithmic enhancements of the classic MD and MC frameworks essentially aim to enhance their
sampling of the structure space of a biomolecule. A review of state-of-the-art enhancements can be
found in the work of Maximova et al. (2016).
In this survey paper, we focus instead on emerging contributions from the Robotics community
on how to enhance sampling with complementary algorithmic strategies. Specifically, we review
robotics-inspired methods designed to model structural excursions of a biomolecule at equilibrium
by building conceptually over techniques designed originally for robot motion planning. These
methods have now reached a crucial stage. They have been shown applicable to characterization of
diverse molecular mechanisms in computational structural biology, such as protein-ligand binding,
folding and unfolding of peptides, proteins, and RNA molecules, and transitions of small peptides
and large proteins between thermodynamically-stable and semi-stable structural states. As this survey shows, these methods are capable of addressing challenging computational issues posed in each
of these application settings, but they have yet to be widely adopted by the computational biology
community at large. For various reasons, some of which are discussed in this survey, these methods
are seen as providing an efficient but less detailed and less accurate characterization of biomolecular equilibrium structure and dynamics. This survey provides a critical review of robotics-inspired
methods and lays out outstanding issues that need to be addressed for these methods to be considered reliable tools and be widely adopted for modeling biomolecular structure and dynamics.
513

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

This survey is organized as follows. A background of models of biomolecular energetics and
geometry is provided in Section 2. Section 3 then introduces the main classes of problems in
biomolecular modeling addressed with robotics-inspired methods, summarizes the robot motion
planning frameworks over which such methods build, and concludes with a brief description of
challenges faced by robotics-inspired methods in the context of biomolecular modeling. Section 4
provides examples of design decisions that address such challenges through a comprehensive and
detailed review of robotics-inspired methods for modeling biomolecular structure and dynamics.
Section 5 concludes this survey with a critical summary of remaining challenges and a discussion
of several prospects for future research.

2. Background
The structural excursions that regulate the recognition events in which a biomolecule participates in
the cell can be understood via a theoretical treatment of biomolecules as thermodynamic systems
hopping between energetic states. These hops are fundamentally the result of concerted motions
of the atoms that make up a biomolecule; in any physical system, constitutive particles are in a
state of perpetual motion, fuelled by thermal excitation, all the while subjecting one another to
physical forces (Cooper, 1984). These forces cumulatively drive a molecular system toward lowerenergy states, while thermal excitations kick them off locally-optimal states, providing sufficient
randomness to allow the entire system undergo a biased exploration of its structure space.
In the following we first summarize current knowledge on atomic forces and biomolecular energy functions that are employed in computational treatments of biomolecular structure and dynamics. The rest of this Section provides details on biomolecular geometry, showing how biomolecules
can be treated mechanistically as modular systems composed of numerous, heterogeneous components for the purpose of characterizing their equilibrium structure and dynamics in silico.
2.1 Biomolecular Energetics: Molecular Mechanics
The physical interactions among the particles that make up a molecular system can in principle be
measured via quantum mechanics (QM) methods. QM methods can carry out detailed and accurate
electronic structure calculations but are currently limited in their applicability to molecular systems
composed of no more than a few hundred atoms (Khaliullin, VandeVondele, & Hutter, 2013). Instead, molecular mechanics (MM) methods are now the methods of choice to evaluate structures
of macromolecules, such as proteins, RNA, DNA, and other large molecular systems comprised of
several molecules.
Though it was long known that atoms in a molecule subject one another to physical forces, such
as Coulomb forces and others, it was the work of Levitt and Warshel in the Lifson laboratory at the
Weizmann Institute of Science that propelled the design of consistent (now known as MM) energy
functions for molecules. Lifson argued that it should be possible to come up with a small number of
consistent, transferable parameters that do not depend on the local environment of an atom and allow
analyzing the energetics of small crystalline molecules (Lifson & Warshel, 1968). Kendrew realized
that such consistent energy functions could be used to conduct energetic evaluations on different
placements (that is, structures) of the atoms comprising proteins and nucleic acids. Levitt and
Lifson operationalized this realization to conduct energy refinements of protein structures (Levitt &
Lifson, 1969).
514

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

MM energy functions have now become more detailed and accurate, but they are still estimates
of the true potential energy of a molecule, summing up the possible, physical interactions between
atoms in a molecule. Research on designing MM energy functions is active, and there are now many
different functions offered from different computational chemistry labs across the world. These
functions largely follow a common functional form, and categorize pairwise atomic interactions
into local and non-local interactions; it should be noted that more accurate energy functions are
available that consider n-particle interactions, but these are more computationally expensive and
not widely adopted (Clementi, 2008). Local interactions concern modeling forces due to bonds,
bond angles, and the periodicity of dihedral/torsion angles. Non-local interactions are divided into
electrostatic (measured through the Coulomb potential) and van der Waals (measured through the
Lennard-Jones  LJ  potential) interactions. These different types of interactions are typically
linearly combined together, each with its own weight, to associate a potential energy value with a
particular placement of atoms in a given molecular structure.
The following equation provides an example of the popular CHARMM energy function (Brooks,
Bruccoleri, Olafson, States, Swaminathan, & Karplus, 1983) that is integrated in the NAMD software package for simulation of biomolecular dynamics (Phillips, Braun, Wang, Gumbart, Tajkhorshid, Villa, Chipot, Skeel, Kale, & Schulten, 2005).

ECHARMM =

X

kb  (b  b0 )2

+

kUB  (S  S0 )2

+

X

+

bonds

X
UB

k (  0 )2

valence angles

X

k  (1 + cos(n  ))

+

kimp (  0 )2

+

dihedral angles

X
improper dihedral angles

X
nonbonded atoms i, j

X
nonbonded atomsi, j

ij

h Rmin 
Rminij 6 i
ij 12
2
+
rij
rij

qi  qj
  rij

The k weights are constants, and the 0 subscript indicates equilibrium, ideal values of distances
and angles. The first term effectively penalizes deviations of bond lengths from equilibrium values
with a quadratic potential. The second term, also referred to as the Urey Bradley (UB) or the
1,3 term, introduces a similar penalty for pairs of atoms separated by two covalent bonds, with the
distance between two atoms involved in a 1,3 interaction denoted by S. The third term is a quadratic
potential for valence angles (between two consecutive bonds), denoted by . The fourth term is a
potential calculated over dihedral/torsion angles  and models the presence of steric barriers between
atoms separated by three covalent bonds. In this term, the n and  variables are the multiplicity and
the phase angles, respectively. In CHARMM, improper dihedral angles are specially penalized, as
in the fifth term. The sixth term shows the LJ potential in CHARMM. In the LJ term summing up
515

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

van der Waals interactions between non-bonded atoms, rij measures the Euclidean distance between
two non-bonded atoms (that are not covered by the UB term), and Rminij = (Rmini + Rminj )/2
is the minimum interaction radius between the atoms, measured as half the sum of the known van
der Waals radii Rmini and Rminj (ij is a weight specific to the types of atoms i and j). The LJ
term sums up a weak attraction at long distances and strong repulsion at short distances. The LJ
term in CHARMM has a 126 functional form, with an exponent of 12 for the repulsive sub-term
and an exponent of 6 for the attractive sub-term. The last term in the CHARMM function measures
electrostatic interactions via the Coulomb potential: qi and qj are the known partial charges of atoms
i and j, rij measures the Euclidean distance between atoms i and j, and  is the dielectric constant
encoding the type of environment in which a biomolecule is (vacuum or different types of solvent
environments).
Differences between available potential energy functions are due to different weights, different
exponents used to measure the repulsion versus attraction terms in the van der Waals interaction,
explicit estimation of hydrogen-bonding interactions outside the umbrella of van der Waals interactions, and more (Hornak, Abel, Okur, Strockbine, Roitberg, & Simmerling, 2006). The Amber suite
of energy functions, integrated in the Amber MD simulation package (Case, Darden, Cheatham,
Simmerling, Wang, Duke, Luo, Merz, Pearlman, Crowley, Walker, Zhang, Wang, Hayik, Roitberg,
Seabra, Wong, Paesani, Wu, Brozell, Tsui, Gohlke, Yang, Tan, Mongan, et al., 2014), OPLS (Jorgensen, Maxwell, & Tirado-Reves, 1988), and CHARMM follow a similar functional form. Other
similar functions are CEDAR (Hermans, Berendsen, van Gunsteren, & Postma, 1984) and GROMOS (van Gunsteren, Billeter, Eising, Hunenberger, Kruger, Mark, Scott, & Tironi, 1996), now incorporated in the GROMACS simulation package (Van Der Spoel, Lindahl, Hess, Groenhof, Mark,
& Berendsen, 2005), and others. A review of these functions, known as physics-based function,
can be found in the work of Ponder and Case (2003). Other functions, known as knowledge-based
function, include additional terms derived from conducting statistics over known active structures of
proteins in the PDB. Such functions are best suited for specific applications, such as rapid modeling
of equilibrium structures. Rosetta (Leaver-Fay, Tyka, Lewis, Lange, Thompson, Jacak, Kaufman,
Renfrew, Smith, Sheffler, Davis, Cooper, Treuille, Mandell, Richter, Ban, Fleishman, Corn, Kim,
Lyskov, Berrondo, Mentzer, Popovi, & et. al., 2011) and Quark (Xu & Zhang, 2012) are recent
examples of knowledge-based functions.
Whether physics-based or knowledge-based (or hybrid), all current molecular energy functions
are models and, as such, they contain inherent errors that need to be taken into account when modeling biomolecular structure and dynamics (Hornak et al., 2006). In addition, in all such functions, despite the specific functional form, the most computationally expensive terms are the LJ
and Coulomb terms due to the summation over pairs of atoms. These terms are also the ones that
are most sensitive to small atomic motions. In particular, the 12-6 functional form of the LJ term
provides great complexity and non-linearity to the energy surface that one can associate with the
structure space of a biomolecule. It is quite common to reduce the total energy of a structure by
a few hundred calories solely due to improvements in the LJ term from imperceptible changes in
atomic positions. Moreover, small atomic displacements can lower the value of one term while
increasing that of another in the energy function. From an optimization point of view, the terms that
are linearly combined in an energy function are essentially conflicting optimization objectives. In
computational biology, this issue is known as frustration and results in rugged or rough energy
surfaces (that is, rich in local minima). In the broader AI community, such surfaces would be referred to as multi-modal. While true biomolecular energy surfaces are not overly rugged (known
516

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

as the principle of minimal frustration) (Clementi, 2008; Nevo, Brumfeld, Kapon, Hinterdorfer, &
Reich, 2005), the modeled energy surfaces that one can probe in silico with the current energy functions have been shown exceptionally rugged (Olson & Shehu, 2012; Molloy, Saleh, & Shehu, 2013;
Lois, Blawzdziewicz, & OHern, 2010).
2.2 The Biomolecular Energy Surface
Equilibrium biomolecular dynamics can be visualized as structural excursions on the energy surface. The picture that emerges for proteins is that of a funnel-like, multidimensional energy surface (Onuchic et al., 1997; Dill & Chan, 1997). Projecting the surface onto few coordinates that
capture relevant features of the different structures would allow summarizing and thus visualizing
the energy surface in terms of a landscape (Onuchic & Wolynes, 2004).
The energy landscape shown in two different camera views in Figure 2 illustrates protein energy
landscapes expected to be reconstructed in silico. Horizontal cross-sections of the landscape every
dE units apart correspond to the different energetic states. The cross-sections go down in width as
energy decreases; there are fewer options to place atoms in a molecule as potential energy gets lower
without incurring energetic costs greater than dE. The width of a cross-section, or the structural
diversity of an energetic state, is captured in the notion of entropy. Thermodynamically-stable states
are those with low free energy F , measured as F = hEi  T  S, where hEi is the average potential
energy over structures grouped together in the state, T is temperature, and S is entropy.
The first visual illustration, proposed by Dill and Chan (1997), highlighted the main features
expected of true protein energy landscapes, a single, deep and wide basin corresponding to the
thermodynamically-stable state and few other shallower, narrower basins corresponding to metastable states serving as possible kinetic traps. The landscape shown in Figure 2(a) is a synthetic
one that is closer to the landscapes corresponding to existing MM energy functions; the landscape
is not smooth but rather rich in local minima; in other words, the landscape is highly rugged or
rough. A different camera view in Figure 2(b) emphasizes the presence of multiple, similarly-deep
and wide basins among which current energy functions cannot further distinguish for the purpose of
predicting the most stable state via energetic-based arguments; given the inherent errors, structurefunction arguments cannot depend on small energetic differences.
The energy landscape view was instrumental in linking molecular structure, dynamics, and function. Viewing proteins and other biomolecules in terms of their energy landscapes gave rise to better
understanding folding and binding as diffusion-like processes and not as a series of sequential, deterministic events. Under the new, landscape view (Baldwin, 1995), biomolecules can reach their most
stable state at equilibrium by tumbling down the energy landscape along multiple routes (Bryngelson & Wolynes, 1987; Bryngelson, Onuchic, Socci, & Wolynes, 1995; Onuchic & Wolynes, 2004).
In light of the new view, the intermediate, meta-stable states in which proteins would sometimes be
found in the wet laboratory before transitioning to their most stable state correspond to other wide
basins in the landscape. An illustration of this is provided in Figure 2(b).
The new view inspired a new understanding of dynamic molecular processes, known as conformational selection or population shift (Ma, Kumar, Tsai, & Nussinov, 1999; Tsai, Ma, & Nussinov,
1999b; Tsai, Kumar, Ma, & Nussinov, 1999a). Conformational selection refers to the idea that all
states of an unbound molecular unit are present and accessible by the bound unit. For many unbound/uncomplexed biomolecules, there may be many semi-stable states at equilibrium. The proximity of a ligand or another molecular partner shifts the equilibrium (and thus the probability distri517

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

(a) Illustration of a complex energy landscape

(b) Tilted camera view highlights the presence of multiple energy basins
Figure 2: (a) The shown landscape illustrates what is often reconstructed in silico, rough landscapes rich
in local minima. (b) The tilted camera view emphasizes the presence of multiple energetic basins. A basin
is defined as the neighborhood of a local minimum in a fitness landscape. The interested reader is encouraged to learn more about features of landscapes that arise in optimization problems in Stadlers seminal
review (Stadler, 2002). Given the high dimensionality of the structure space, many methods that probe energy
landscapes cannot guarantee that a particular, sought stable or meta-stable state will be captured among the
probed basins, or that none of the probed basins are artifacts of the energy function employed.

bution over possible states in which a system is found at equilibrium) towards one of the states that
are close to optimal at equilibrium in the unbound/uncomplexed molecule. In other words, the presence of a binding partner can be considered an external perturbation to the unbound/uncomplexed
energy landscape. Internal perturbations refer to changes in a biomolecules composition itself due
to changes to DNA, copy read errors, and other post-translation modifications that can occur. In
many aberrant versions of a biomolecule, energy barriers between stable and semi-stable states can
518

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

drastically change and modify the underlying detailed structural mechanism regulating function,
resulting in dysfunction or even loss of function (Clausen, Ma, Nussinov, & Shehu, 2015).
The principle of conformational selection allows employing analysis of energy landscapes of
unbound molecules to identify structural states of interest for complexation events. The latter can
be found among the meta-stable and stable states of the uncomplexed molecule and can thus be
identified via modeling and simulation of the uncomplexed molecule.
2.3 Computing Structures and Structural Transitions
The two main problems that can be addressed in silico to elucidate biomolecular equilibrium structure and dynamics concern (i) computing the ensemble of structures constituting the stable and
meta-stable states relevant for biological function and (ii) computing the detailed structural transitions between such structures. The first problem is amenable to stochastic optimization, as it fundamentally involves locating deep and wide basins/minima in a nonlinear and multimodal energy
surface. The second problem entails elucidating the different routes employed by a biomolecule as it
switches between two structures. This survey focuses primarily on the second problem, that of computing structural transitions in bound and unbound biomolecules. Specifically, the survey reviews
methods that employ robotics analogies to address this problem. While, in principle, roboticsinspired methods can also provide information on the structure space available to a biomolecule at
equilibrium, other, more powerful stochastic optimization algorithms now exist for this purpose. We
refer interested readers to the review by Shehu (2013), which surveys state-of-the-art evolutionary
algorithms (EAs) capable of extracting efficient, discrete representations of protein energy surfaces.
At a minimum, all algorithms aiming to model biomolecular structures are comprised of three
functional units: (i) a way to represent/model a biomolecular structure; (ii) a way to modify such
models in order to obtain new structures; (iii) and a way to evaluate the energetics of such structures.
The existing MM energy functions summarized above in the context of biomolecular energetics
provide a way to evaluate models of biomolecular structures explored in silico. The functional units
(i) and (iii) are related, as the model chosen for a protein structure determines to a great extent
what moves or perturbation operators can be designed to efficiently and effectively explore the
structure space. Below, we summarize models that are now popular among the different algorithms
employed to model equilibrium structures and dynamics of biomolecules. Details regarding the
moves or perturbation operators designed to interface with such models are provided later in this
survey when reviewing robotics-inspired methods.
2.4 Molecular Models: Selecting Variables of Interest
Covalent bonds link atoms together in a molecule. In protein molecules, atoms are organized into
amino acids, which come in twenty different types in nature. All amino acids contain a common
core of heavy atoms that make up its backbone and a unique set of heavy atoms that make up its
side chain (hydrogen/light atoms are found both in the backbone and side-chain groups). The twenty
naturally-occurring amino acids only differ in their side chain. Figure 3(a) shows the N, CA, C, and
O heavy-atoms that comprise the backbone of an amino acid and further illustrates how amino acids
are connected via covalent, peptide bonds in a serial fashion to form a (polypeptide) chain. What is
referred to as a protein is often just one polypeptide chain; in protein-protein binding polypeptide
chains stay together via non-covalent, weak interactions.
519

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: (a) In this chain of six amino acids, backbone atoms are N (gray), CA (black), C (gray), and O
(silver). A peptide bond Ni -Ci+1 links two amino acids (i proceeds from N- to C-terminus, which refer to
backbone N and C atoms not in peptide bonds). Circled atoms comprise the side chain of each shown amino
acid. (b) The three types of internal coordinates are shown here, the bond length di , the valence angle i
between two consecutive angles, and the torsion or dihedral angle i defined by three consecutive bonds. The
dihedral angle is the angle between the two normals corresponding to each of the planes that can be defined
by consecutive bonds j and j + 1 and consecutive bonds j + 1 and j + 2. Depending on which backbone
bonds they are defined, the i dihedral angles are referred to as either  or , and annotated with the position
of the amino acid on which they are defined (in the direction of the N- to the C-terminus). For instance, i
refers to the dihedral angle on the bond connecting the backbone N to the backbone CA atom of amino acid
i, and i refers to the dihedral angle defined on the bond connecting the backbone CA to the backbone C
atom of amino acid i. Characteristic values are observed for the , psi angles among equilibrium protein
structures (Ramachandran et al., 1963).

520

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

Figure 3(a) illustrates that side chains dangle off the backbone of a polypeptide chain. Treating
a protein molecule as a model where atoms are represented as balls and bonds between them as
sticks exposes interesting questions regarding how to perform deformations of the model without
breaking covalent bonds. This question is in essence what structure modeling researchers have
to answer when defining variables to represent a molecule so as to be able to capture its intrinsic
flexibility at equilibrium.
2.4.1 C ARTESIAN C OORDINATE -BASED M ODELS
In the most intuitive model of a molecular structure, each Cartesian coordinate of each atom is
selected as a variable. The Cartesian coordinate-based model is the preferred one by MD algorithms, which move individual atoms in a molecule according to the cumulative force that sums
up interactions of an atom with all others in a molecule. However, this model is not ideal. First,
it is redundant, demanding 3N variables for a molecule of N atoms. In small peptide and drug
molecules, the number of atoms may be in the dozens, but even in small proteins, the number of
atoms can easily surpass a hundred; as a result, the variable space has hundreds of dimensions.
Many strategies have been offered to reduce the number of variables by essentially removing
certain atoms from modeling. For example, side-chain atoms are the first to be sacrificed in protein
structure modeling, since it has been demonstrated that the main features of equilibrium protein
structures are captured by the backbone (Rose, Fleming, Banavar, & Maritan, 2006). Once such
reduced structures are modeled, side chains can be modeled via side-chain packing algorithms. In
other studies focusing on modeling molecular interactions, only atoms that comprise the interaction
site are explicitly modeled. These decisions effectively result in reduced models (and thus fewer dimensions of the selected variable space), ranging from CA traces, where only the central CA atom
is modeled in each amino acid, to backbone models, where only the backbone chain is tracked in
3d space (Papoian, Ulander, Eastwood, Luthey-Schulten, & Wolynes, 2004; Matysiak & Clementi,
2004; Das, Matysiak, & Clementi, 2005; Matysiak & Clementi, 2006; Hoang, Trovato, Seno, Banavar, & Maritan, 2007; Rose et al., 2006). There is now a rich literature on reduced models and the
energy functions designed to interface with these models (Clementi, 2008).
Representing a molecular structure in terms of the Cartesian coordinates of all (or a subset of)
the constitutive atoms is appealing, as any new instantiation in the variable space can be readily
evaluated in terms of its energetics. We recall that the central LJ and electrostatic/Coulomb terms
in the energy functions that are now widely adopted in biomolecular structure and dynamics modeling operate over 3d coordinates of atoms. However, the Cartesian coordinate-based model is both
redundant and ineffective. First, the model results in an excessive number of variables, which poses
great challenges for any sampling-based method aimed at probing the structure space one sample at
a time. Second, it is ineffective, as it does not encode in it any of the explicit and implicit geometric
constraints present in molecular structures.
Many efforts in the computational biophysics community target the reduction of coordinates.
The resulting models are referred to as coarse-grained models or representations. The first such
model, employed in an MC simulation of the folding of the bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor,
represented each amino-acid residue with one pseudo-atom (Levitt & Warshel, 1975). Work on
coarse-grained and multiscale models (in the latter, different parts of the structure are represented
at different levels of detail/resolution at different time and length scales) has been key to extend
the spatio-temporal reach of MD and MC simulations of biomolecular dynamics. Such work has
521

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

the additional onerous task of designing accompanying energy functions that reproduce known
thermodynamic properties even at lower or mixed structural resolution. Indeed, the 2013 Nobel
Prize to Warshel recognized seminal work by him in multiscale models built with the QM/MM
method (Warshel & Levitt, 1976; Warshel, 2003; Kamerlin, Haranczyk, & Warshel, 2009; Mukherjee & Warshel, 2011, 2012; Dryga, Chakrabarty, Vicatos, & Warshel, 2011; Rychkova, Mukherjee,
Bora, & Warshel, 2013; Mukherjee & Warshel, 2013). The interested reader is directed to the review
by Clementi (2008) on coarse-grained models. The review by Zhou (2014) focuses on multiscale
models.
2.4.2 E NCODING VARIABLE D EPENDENCIES IN C ARTESIAN C OORDINATE -BASED M ODELS
Outside of the realm of modeling chemical reaction processes, such as bond formation and breaking,
when modeling biomolecular equilibrium structures and dynamics, other application setups require
preserving certain structural features that can be formulated as local and non-local constraints. Some
constraints, such as keeping bonded atoms at a distance no more than the ideal/equilibrium length of
their bond, are known as explicit, local constraints. They are trivially extracted from specification of
the chemical composition of a molecule, as they involve neighboring atoms. Equilibrium conditions
place additional, implicit constraints on biomolecular structures. The need to preserve favorable
Lennard-Jones interactions, for instance, places (non-local/long-range) constraints over non-bonded
atoms. Such long-range constraints cannot be effectively captured by a model where there is a
variable for each Cartesian coordinate of each atom. Any perturbation operator that interfaces with
such a model and modifies such variables has no information on invalid or energetically-unfavorable
assignments to subsets of variables, as variable dependencies are not captured in the model. An
external energy model is crucial here in the form of an energy function to evaluate the results of the
perturbation operator and detect variable instantiations resulting in violations.
The Cartesian coordinate-based model can encode variable dependencies. The latter can be
extracted via several techniques, including multivariate analysis techniques that analyze known
equilibrium structures of a biomolecule to identify subsets of atoms that exhibit simultaneous displacements; that is, move in concert. The essential premise of such techniques is that such known
structures are good examples of solutions or near-solutions of the energy function, and that analysis
of such examples will expose variable dependencies. These dependencies can then be employed
to design reduced Cartesian coordinate-based models that readily encode in them the energetic
constraints satisfied by the provided examples (solution or near-solution structures) and effective
perturbation operators that readily yield new near-solution instantiations in the reduced variable
space (Clausen & Shehu, 2015).
Multivariate Analysis Techniques to Obtain Collective Variables The sub-field of statistical
techniques for the identification of collective motions, which are also referred to as collective coordinates or collective variables is rich, and a review is not the subject of our survey. Instead, we point
to recent work in the narrow context of biomolecular modeling, where variance-maximizing techniques, such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA) (Shlens, 2003), Isomap (Tenenbaum, de Silva,
& Langford, 2000), Locally Linear Embedding (Roweis & Saul, 2000), Diffusion Maps (Coifman,
Lafon, Lee, Maggioni, Nadler, Warner, & Zucker, 2005), and others (van der Maaten, Postma, & van
den Herik, 2009) have been employed to analyze biomolecular structures and dynamics (Teodoro,
Phillips, & Kavraki, 2003; Das, Moll, Stamati, Kavraki, & Clementi, 2006; Plaku, Stamati, Clementi,
& Kavraki, 2007; Gorfe et al., 2008; Grant et al., 2009; Hori, Chikenji, & Takada, 2009; Maisuradze,
522

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

Liwo, & Scheraga, 2009; Rohrdanz, Zheng, Maggioni, & Clementi, 2011; Zheng, Rohrdanz, Maggioni, & Clementi, 2011) and, more importantly, identify variables that represent collective motions
of atoms (Zheng, Rohrdanz, & Clementi, 2013; Clausen & Shehu, 2015; Clausen et al., 2015; Molloy, Clausen, & Shehu, 2016; Maximova, Plaku, & Shehu, 2015). In addition to these methods,
other ones such as Normal Mode Analysis (NMA) (Ciu & Bahar, 2005) also have a rich history
in computational structural biology (Atilgan, Durell, Jernigan, Demirel, Keskin, & Bahar, 2001;
Delarue & Sanejouand, 2002; Kim, Chirikjian, & Jernigan, 2002b; Zheng & Doniach, 2003; Tama,
Valle, Frank, & Brooks, 2003; Bahar & Rader, 2005; Maragakis & Karplus, 2005; Zheng & Brooks,
2005; Zheng, Brooks, & Hummer, 2007; Yang, Song, Carriquiry, & Jernigan, 2008; Yang, Majek,
& Bahar, 2009; Das, Gur, Cheng, Jo, Bahar, & Roux, 2014). The normal modes extracted from
NMA are also often employed as as effective perturbation operators in robotics-inspired methods (Tama & Sanejouand, 2001; Kim, Jernigan, & Chirikjian, 2002a; Kirillova, Cortes, Stefaniu, &
Simeon, 2008; Schuyler, Jernigan, Wasba, Ramakrishnan, & Chirikjian, 2009; Teknipar & Zheng,
2010; Baron, 2013; Al-Bluwi, Vaisset, Simeon, & Cortes, 2013). Our summary and highlights of
robotics-inspired methods later in this survey describe in greater detail collective variables and their
employment in effective perturbation operators.
2.5 Internal Coordinate- and Angular-Based Models
The internal coordinate model has been offered as an effective alternative to the Cartesian coordinatebased model (Burgess & Scheraga, 1975). In the internal-coordinate model, the only variables
selected are bond lengths, angles between two consecutive bonds, and torsion or dihedral angles
between three consecutive bonds. Figure 3(b) provides an illustration. This model allows for fast
forward kinematics, as changes to Cartesian coordinates as a result of changes to the values of these
variables can be efficiently calculated via accumulation of rigid-body transformations (Craig, 1989;
Zhang & Kavraki, 2002a).
Internal coordinate-based models are now the norm in non-MD based molecular structure modeling. An additional simplification is made for equilibrium protein structures. Analysis of deposited
equilibrium structures of proteins reveals that bond lengths and bond angles are constrained to characteristic values (Engh & Huber, 1991). This is a consequence of the energetic constraints placed
on structures at equilibrium and is exploited to idealize protein geometry in modeling by effectively
removing bond lengths and bond angles from the list of variables in the model. This leaves only
dihedral angles defined over three consecutive bonds as variables (,  backbone angles and at
most four dihedral side-chain angles per amino acid, as shown in Figure 3(a)) and is computationally appealing, as the number of dihedral angles for a polypeptide chain of N atoms is on average
3N/7 (Abayagan, Totrov, & Kuznetsov, 1994). It is worth noting that bond lengths and bond angles do change even at equilibrium, but at a faster pace than other motions. Employing idealized
geometry allows devoting computation to obtaining the slower fluctuations first. Once structures
representative of a molecules equilibrium dynamics are obtained, deviations of bond lengths and
bond angles can be introduced and studied via more detailed models.
2.5.1 B IOMOLECULES AS K INEMATIC C HAINS WITH R EVOLUTE J OINTS
Idealizing protein geometry reveals mechanistic analogies with kinematic chains with revolute
joints. Similarly to how a joint rotation changes positions of following links, so does rotation
by a dihedral angle change positions of following atoms (Craig, 1989). These analogies have been
523

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

employed by robotics researchers to apply algorithms that plan motions for kinematic chains with
revolute joints to the study of protein conformations (Manocha & Zhu, 1994; Singh, Latombe, &
Brutlag, 1999; Apaydin, Singh, Brutlag, & Latombe, 2001; Amato, Dill, & Song, 2003; Apaydin,
Brutlag, Guestrin, Hsu, & Latombe, 2003; Song & Amato, 2004; Cortes, Simeon, & Tran, 2004;
Cortes, Simeon, Guieysse, Remaud-Simeon, & Tran, 2005; Lee, Streinu, & Brock, 2005; Kim
et al., 2002a; Chiang, Apaydin, Brutlag, Hsu, & Latombe, 2007; Shehu & Olson, 2010; Molloy
et al., 2013; Molloy & Shehu, 2013; Haspel, Moll, Baker, Chiu, & E., 2010; Shehu, Clementi, &
Kavraki, 2006). Unlike typical articulated robotic mechanisms, protein chains pose hundreds rather
than a dozen variables (a short backbone of 50 amino acids poses 100 dihedral angles as variables).
The analogies between protein chains and kinematic chains with revolute joints are popular
among robotics researchers proposing robotics-inspired methods for modeling biomolecular structure and dynamics. For instance, torsional angles were employed early to model protein ligand
binding (Singh et al., 1999) and remain popular in modeling the kinetics of folding in small protein
and RNA molecules (Han & Amato, 2001; Amato et al., 2003; Song & Amato, 2004; Thomas,
Song, & Amato, 2005; Thomas, Tang, Tapia, & Amato, 2007; Tang, Thomas, Tapia, Giedroc, &
Amato, 2008; Tapia, Thomas, & Amato, 2010). Such angles have also proved popular in computing
functionally-relevant structures of peptides and proteins (Haspel, Tsai, Wolfson, & Nussinov, 2003;
Shehu et al., 2006; Shehu, Clementi, & Kavraki, 2007; Shehu, Kavraki, & Clementi, 2007, 2008;
Cortes et al., 2004; Shehu, Kavraki, & Clementi, 2009; Shehu, 2009; Shehu & Olson, 2010; Molloy
et al., 2013), as well as in modeling peptides and proteins switching between different functionallyrelevant structures (Cortes et al., 2005; Jaillet, Cortes, & Simeon, 2008; Haspel et al., 2010; Jaillet,
Corcho, Perez, & Cortes, 2011; Molloy et al., 2016; Molloy & Shehu, 2013, 2015; Devaurs, Molloy,
Vaisset, Shehu, Cortes, & Simeon, 2015; Molloy & Shehu, 2016).
Techniques to Obtain Reduced Angular-based Models The number of variables in angularbased models can be reduced further via various techniques. For instance, consecutive dihedral
angles can be bundled together into fragments to capture variable dependencies. This technique,
known as molecular fragment replacement and introduced in the context of MC-based methods for
de novo protein structure prediction (Bradley, Misura, & Baker, 2005), allows operationalizing on
the observation that a limited number of configurations are observed for k-bundles of consecutive
dihedral angles among stable protein structures at equilibrium (Han & Baker, 1996). This technique has been incorporated in robotics-inspired methods for modeling equilibrium protein structure and dynamics (Shehu & Olson, 2010; Molloy et al., 2013; Molloy & Shehu, 2013, 2016). Other
application-specific techniques analyze structures to reduce or prioritize the number of dihedral angles for manipulation by a perturbation operator. Rigidity-based techniques, for instance, analyze a
given structure to detect least-constrained regions and suggest an order for which dihedral angles to
modify first or more often in order to focus computational resources to computing the large structural deformations first (Thorpe & Ming, 2004; Wells, Menor, Hespenheide, & Thorpe, 2005; Fox
& Streinu, 2013). Rigidity-based analysis has been incorporated in robotics-inspired methods for
modeling protein dynamics (Thomas et al., 2007). Other techniques are aimed specifically at modeling structural transitions in large proteins (Raveh, Enosh, Furman-Schueler, & Halperin, 2009;
Haspel et al., 2010). In these, a comparison of the two structures for which a transition is sought
identifies the differently-valued dihedral angles. In a similar fashion as in rigidity-based analysis,
these angles are prioritized and modified more often by perturbation operators in order to capture
possibly large structural deformations in a reasonable amount of time. All these techniques make
524

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

several assumptions about which variables participate in the process of interest, and we highlight
such assumptions and their implications later in this survey.
Biomolecular Structure versus Biomolecular Conformation In light of the various models that
can be employed to represent biomolecular structure, a distinction needs to be made between the
terms structure and conformation. The term structure is meant to refer to the specification of the
Cartesian coordinates of the atoms that comprise a molecule (even if not all atoms are explicitly
modeled, as in a backbone or reduced structure). The term conformation is meant to be more general and refer to the specification of the values of variables selected in the model of a structure; that
is, a conformation is a particular instantiation in the employed variable space. For instance, a conformation is the instantiation of angles if an angular-based model is employed, and forward kinematics
allows obtaining the structure encoded by such a conformation. It is worth noting that the terms
conformation and structure are often used interchangeably and in a slight abuse of terminology
in biomolecular modeling literature. For instance, many algorithms that explicitly modify structures via Cartesian coordinate-based models are referred to as conformational search algorithms;
of course, when such models are employed, a structure can be extracted trivially from a conformation. In this survey, the distinction made above will be observed when referring to structures and
conformations.
In the specific domain of robotics-inspired methods, the term (molecular) conformation is equivalent to (robot) configuration. However, in keeping with the broader computational biology literature, we will employ the term conformation when referring to macromolecules, such as proteins,
RNA, and DNA, reserving the term configuration for small molecules (also referred to as ligands)
that bind to macromolecules. In addition, while the term variable is often referred to as parameter in the broader computational biology and biophysics literature and degree of freedom (dof) in
robotics and AI literature, we will employ the more general, non-domain specific term of variable
and variable space. That is, a (molecular) conformation is an instantiation in the space of selected
variables. Depending on the number of variables selected to model the molecule under investigation, the variable space may be high-dimensional. Mapping a conformation to its corresponding
structure allows associating a structure space to the employed variable space. Moreover, energy
functions allow associating an energy surface to the structure space, and interesting observations
regarding stable and semi-stable structural states and excursions among such states can be made by
analyzing the structure space and low-dimensional projections/embeddings of its underlying energy
surface, hence the energy landscape.
Educational Resources The purpose of the material related above is to provide enough detail on
biomolecular geometry to allow seeing how biomolecules can be treated mechanistically as modular systems composed of numerous, heterogeneous components for the purpose of characterizing
them in silico. Further information for readers of varying levels of background or interest can be
found in online, educational learning modules designed to introduce computer scientists to computational structural biology. One such set of modules, publicly accessible under the cnx project and
highly popular with students and researchers, can be found at http://cnx.org/contents/
9cMfjngH@6.3:ppj-3H2A@14/Structural-Computational-Biolo. In these modules, for instance, interested readers can learn about protein architecture in greater detail. Other
modules mirror the material summarized here on representations and energy functions, and yet others introduce readers to forward and inverse kinematics for modular mechanical systems, making
these modules a good supplement to the survey of robotics-inspired methods presented here.
525

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

3. Summary of Biomolecular Modeling Problems and Robot Motion Planning
Frameworks
We introduce the main classes of problems in biomolecular modeling that are addressed with
robotics-inspired methods. The robot motion planning frameworks over which these methods build
are summarized next. The section concludes with a summary of challenges faced by algorithmic realizations of such frameworks for modeling biomolecular structure and dynamics. These challenges
are a preview of important design decisions that are detailed in Section 4 in the context of reviewing
representative methods.
3.1 Representative Problems in Biomolecular Modeling
Two main classes of molecular mechanisms are studied by robotics-inspired methods, those that
involve more than one molecule associating/complexating with or disassociating from one another,
and those that involve a dynamic, uncomplexated molecule. As application setups, both concern
informing our understanding of dynamic events involving dynamic molecules.
In the first application setup, robotics-inspired methods aim to model and understand proteinligand binding events. Provided unbound structures of the protein receptor and a small ligand
molecule, the objective is to elucidate how the ligand approaches and then binds the protein receptor. In a related problem, the reverse process is addressed. The ligand is bound to the receptor,
and the goal is to determine motions of the ligand and the protein receptor that allow disassociation.
Modeling protein-ligand binding is important not only for a general understanding of our biology
but also for computation-aided drug discovery. While other molecular recognition events such as
protein-protein, protein-DNA, protein-RNA, and protein-membrane binding conceptually fall in the
same category as protein-ligand binding, they are more challenging due to the higher number of
variables needed to model the association or complexation event and are currently beyond the domain of applicability of robotics-inspired methods.
The second application setup concerns modeling and understanding the dynamics of molecules.
Almost exclusively, the focus of robotics-inspired techniques in this category are uncomplexed protein and RNA molecules. The goal is to elucidate the structural deformations or motions that allow
a protein or an RNA molecule to transition between two structural states of interest. These states
can be the unfolded and folded state, in which case the goal is to highlight folding and unfolding
paths, or they can both be stable or semi-stable structures employed by the molecule to recognize
and lock onto different molecules, in which case the goal is to formulate hypothesis regarding the
impact of structure in molecular recognitions in the healthy and diseased cell.
Figures 4-5 illustrates these problems. In Figure 4, a robotics-inspired method can highlight how
the ligand approaches the protein receptor, as well as where it binds onto the receptor and into what
configuration. The variables of interest need at a minimum to include the translational and rotational
variables of the ligand, as well as internal coordinates to capture the potential structural flexibility
of the ligand. The receptor can be considered frozen in 3d space. A more accurate setup would
also consider internal coordinates of the receptor in order to model its possible structural flexibility
upon ligand binding. However, the resulting number of variables would be too large. A roboticsinspired method can not only elucidate the bound ligand configuration and its bound placement
relative to the receptor, but also the possible routes of successive configurations and placements
that the ligand may follow to approach the binding site(s). In addition, as Figure 5(a) illustrates,
a robotics-inspired method can show the possible routes of successive structures employed by a
526

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

Figure 4: (a) Where and how does the ligand bind to the protein receptor? Many methods are designed to
elucidate the step-by-step process of how a ligand approaches a protein molecule, where it binds, and with
what configuration.

protein to fold, thus shedding light into the process of protein folding and unfolding. Similar setups
consider RNA molecules. Figure 5(b) illustrates that often robotics-inspired methods are employed
to reveal not only folding or unfolding routes of a protein, but also structural transitions between any
two structures of interest; knowledge of the most probable routes that carry out the transition allows
understanding at a structural level the mechanism by which a biomolecule regulates its biological
activity in the cell.
3.2 Foundations of Robotics-inspired Treatments of Biomolecules
The fundamental assumption of robotics-inspired treatments of biomolecules is that mechanistic
analogies between molecular chains and robot chains allow putting together efficient algorithms for
rapid exploration of molecular structure spaces and modeling of excursions of molecules on such
spaces (Manocha & Zhu, 1994; Singh et al., 1999; Apaydin et al., 2001; Amato et al., 2003; Apaydin
et al., 2003; Song & Amato, 2004; Cortes et al., 2005; Kim et al., 2002a; Chiang et al., 2007;
Kirillova et al., 2008). That is, instead of simulating how a molecule navigates its energy surface
via gradient-based and other local search techniques, more powerful techniques can be put together
by building on algorithms demonstrated to have high exploration capability on robot configuration
spaces. Robotics-inspired treatments of biomolecules draw from techniques for fast forward and
527

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

(a) Protein folding

(b) Structural Transitions
Figure 5: (a) How do proteins fold? Shedding light into the process of protein folding is an important goal,
and many robotics-inspired methods are devoted to elucidating this process step by step by computing the
most probable succession of structures assumed by a protein navigating from the unfolded to the folded state.
(b) How do proteins transition between the diverse structures they use for interacting with different partners in
the cell? Robotics-inspired methods seek to elucidate structural transitions between meta-stable and stable
structural states of a protein.

inverse kinematics and, more importantly, sampling-based algorithms developed in the algorithmic
robotics community to address the robot motion-planning problem (Choset & et al., 2005).
528

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

The objective in robot motion planning is to obtain paths that take a robot from a given, start
configuration to a given, goal configuration. The robot motion planning problem bears mechanistic
analogies to the problem of computing conformations along a transition trajectory of a biomolecule;
in both problems, the driving objective is to uncover what of the underlying (molecular) conformation or (robot) configuration space is employed in motions of an articulated system from a start to a
goal conformation or configuration. Analogies between molecular bonds and robot links and molecular atoms and robot joints help to draw from techniques that perform fast kinematics for kinematic
linkages (Manocha, Zhu, & Wright, 1995; Zhang & Kavraki, 2002b); that is, specifying values for
the variables selected to represent a molecular conformation, rapidly update Cartesian coordinates
of the corresponding structure (Zhang & Kavraki, 2002b). In the inverse kinematics setting, these
techniques allow rapidly obtaining values to underlying variables consistent with Cartesian-based
constraints (Chirikjian, 1993; Manocha & Canny, 1994; Zhang & Kavraki, 2002a; Kolodny, Guibas,
Levitt, & Koehl, 2005).
At a higher level, robotics-inspired methods operationalize on two key observations. The first
observation, originally made for robot configuration spaces, is that solution-containing regions of
a high-dimensional and non-linear variable space can only be found by heuristic rather than exact
approaches; stochastic, or sampling-based techniques can construct the distribution of constraintsatisfying instantiations in a two-stage manner; an initial distribution is first constructed via sampling of the unconstrained variable space. Instantiations are then evaluated through external (energetic) models capable of capturing inter-variable dependencies and penalizing violations of constraints. Violating samples are either removed or down-weighted so the initial, uninformed distribution gradually converges to that containing solutions. The second observation is that transitions of
a system between two given solutions can be modeled via discrete, kinetic models that essentially
embed solutions in graph-like structures amenable to rapid, shortest, or lowest-cost path queries,
provided that lengths or other cost metrics can be associated with a given series of configurations in
a path. Methods that embed solutions in a tree are referred to as tree-based methods, and those that
embed solutions in a graph are referred to as roadmap-based methods.
3.3 The Motion Planning Framework: Tree- and Roadmap-Based Methods
In the context of molecular modeling, tree-based methods grow a tree in conformation space from
a given, start to a given, goal conformation representing the structures bridged by the sought transition. The tree is incrementally extended, with every iteration adding a new conformation node and
a new branch to the tree. Depending on whether the tree is pulled towards configurations sampled
at random over the configuration space or pushed from leaves towards new regions of the configuration space, the method is known as Rapidly Random Exploring Tree (RRT) (LaValle & Kuffner,
2001), or Expansive Spaces Tree (EST) (Hsu, Kindel, Latombe, & Rock, 2002), accordingly. It is
important to note here that the sampling and connectivity go hand in hand, as every sampled conformation is added to the growing tree. The growth of the tree is biased so the goal conformation
can be reached in a reasonable computational time. As a result, tree-based methods are efficient but
limited in their sampling. They are known as single-query methods, as they can only answer one
start-to-goal query at a time; that is, only one path of consecutive conformations that connect the
start to the goal can be extracted. Running them multiple times to sample an ensemble of conformation paths for the same query results in an ensemble with high inter-path correlations due to the
biasing of the conformation tree.
529

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

Roadmap-based methods adapt the Probabilistic Road Map (PRM) framework
(Kavraki, Svestka, Latombe, & Overmars, 1996). Rather than grow a tree in conformation space,
these methods detach the sampling of conformations from the connectivity model that encodes
neighborhood relationships among conformations in the conformation space. Typically, a sampling
stage first provides a discrete representation of the conformation space of interest, with conformations satisfying explicit or implicit geometric and energetic constraints, and then a roadmap building
stage embeds the sampled conformations in a graph/roadmap by connecting each one to its nearest neighbors. Roadmap-based methods can provide richer information regarding a dynamic event,
as multiple paths may exist in the roadmap connecting two structures of interest. Moreover, these
methods support multiple queries, as in principle the same graph can be used to extract paths connecting different given structures. These structures can be specified as conformations and connected
to nearest neighbors in the graph, and then the graph can be queried for optimal paths. In practice,
it is difficult to obtain broad and dense sampling of sufficient regions in the conformation space of
a molecule so as to elucidate diverse excursions between structures of interest.
Below we provide further detail on tree-based and roadmap-based methods in robotics to familiarize the reader with the diverse design decisions employed and even adapted by robotics-inspired
methods for biomolecular modeling.
3.3.1 N ON - HIERARCHICAL T REE -BASED ROBOT M OTION P LANNING M ETHODS
Tree-based methods can be categorized broadly based on the strategies employed to select the vertex
from which to expand the tree. Non-hierarchical strategies consider all the vertices as possible
candidates. Hierarchical strategies place the tree vertices at a bottom layer and introduce additional
high-level layers that group similar vertices together, proceeding from the top to the bottom layer
during the selection process.
RRT is one of the most widely used non-hierarchical tree-based motion planning methods. In
RRT (LaValle & Kuffner, 2001), at each iteration, the tree is expanded towards a randomly-sampled
configuration qrand . The nearest vertex, qnear , in the tree to qrand is determined according to a distance metric. A local planner attempts to connect qnear to qrand . Often the local planner interpolates
over the underlying variables to generate intermediate configurations. In the basic version of RRT,
the iteration stops after one interpolation step. In the connect version, the expansion continues until
qrand is reached or the interpolation results in an invalid configuration, e.g., collision with obstacles.
This process of sampling a configuration and expanding from the nearest neighbor in the tree is repeated until the goal is reached. Figure 6 shows such a tree. By using random sampling and nearest
neighbors, RRT exhibits a Voronoi bias which enables the expansion of the tree toward unexplored
regions. To also bias the search towards the goal, qrand is often selected with probability b (often set
to 0.05) as the goal configuration and with probability 1  b uniformly at random.
Over the years, different RRT variants have been developed in order to improve the exploration.
The adaptive dynamic domain RRT (ADDRRT) (Jaillet, Yershova, LaValle, & Simeon, 2005) associates a sampling radius with each tree vertex and dynamically adjusts the radius based on the
success of the local planner. The reachability-guided RRT (RGRRT) (Shkolnik, Walter, & Tedrake,
2009) relies on the notion of reachable sets to increase the likelihood of successful tree expansions. The obstacle-based RRT (OBRRT) (Rodriguez, Tang, Lien, & Amato, 2006b) increases
sampling near obstacles, PCARRT (Dalibard & Laumond, 2009) relies on PCA, and The selective
retraction-based RRT (SRRRT) (Lee, Kwon, Zhang, & Yoon, 2014) uses bridge sampling and se530

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

Figure 6: The tree built by RRT is shown here on a simplistic environment.

lective retraction in order to facilitate expansions inside narrow passages. The utility-guided RRT
(UGRRT) (Burns & Brock, 2007) associates a utility measure with each vertex and uses it to promote expansions that increase the utility. RRT-Blossom (Kalisiak & van de Panne, 2006) creates
a flood-fill behavior to locally explore the area surrounding each vertex. Machine learning has also
been used to derive a distance metric that captures the cost-to-go in order to improve the exploration
in RRT (Palmieri & Arras, 2015). The reachable volume RRT (RVRRT) (McMahon, Thomas, &
Amato, 2015) relies on the notion of reachable volumes in order to restrict sampling to feasible
regions and improve the performance of RRT on highly-constrained problems. The abstractionguided RRT (fRRT) (Kiesel, Burns, & Ruml, 2012) uses A* search on a grid-based decomposition
to bias RRT sampling towards low-cost regions. RRT* (Karaman & Frazzoli, 2011) rewires the
branches in RRT to find optimal solutions with respect to a given cost function.
EST (Hsu et al., 2002) takes a different approach from RRT by pushing the frontier of the
tree towards unexplored areas. Instead of relying on expansions from the nearest neighbor, EST
maintains a probability distribution over the tree vertices. At each iteration, a vertex v is selected
with probability inversely proportional to the density of a small neighborhood around v. This allows
EST to push the tree towards less-explored regions of the configuration space.
3.3.2 H IERARCHICAL T REE -BASED M OTION P LANNING M ETHODS
Hierarchical tree-based methods rely on a scheme which first selects a region and then a vertex from
which to expand the tree. Regions are often defined based on a decomposition of a low-dimensional
projection of the configuration space. The rationale is that, by grouping similar vertices, better
selections can be made at the region level to effectively guide the tree exploration. For instance,
the single-query, bidirectional, lazy collision-checking (SBL) method (Sanchez & Latombe, 2002)
pushes the tree toward sparse regions by using a grid-based decomposition and uniform probability distributions to select non-empty grid cells. The kinodynamic planning by interior-exterior cell
exploration) (KPIECE) method (Sucan & Kavraki, 2012) relies on a multi-level grid decomposition constructed over user-defined or random linear projections. The synergistic combination of
layers of planning (SyCLoP) method (Plaku, Kavraki, & Vardi, 2010) uses discrete search over a
531

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

low-dimensional triangular or grid decomposition to guide the tree exploration along short region
paths to the goal. The guided sampling tree (GUST) method (Plaku, 2015) partitions the motion
tree into equivalence classes and relies on multi-objective criteria based on shortest-path distances,
selection penalties, and progress made to determine equivalence classes which could result in rapid
expansions toward the goal.
The path-directed subdivision tree (PDST) method (Ladd & Kavraki, 2004, 2005) relies on
a grid subdivision of the configuration space. Each cell in the decomposition keeps track of the
tree branches that fall into it. Initially, the tree has only the root vertex and there is only one cell
corresponding to the minimum and maximum values for each variable. At each iteration, a tree
branch is selected for expansion. The cell c that contains the selected tree branch is divided into
two cells, c1 and c2 , along the largest dimension. The tree branches in c are also split according
to the boundaries between c1 and c2 . This ensures the invariant that a tree branch is contained
entirely in one cell. The selected tree branch b is expanded by picking a configuration q along b and
using propagation to add a new branch starting at q. Propagation is problem-dependent and could
correspond to moving in a random direction.
The propagation continues until a collision is found or a maximum number of steps is reached.
The branch is split when it exits the cell boundaries. A key component of the PDST is the weighting
scheme associated with each cell based on its volume, number of branches, and number of previous
selections. When selecting a tree branch, in order to increase the coverage, priority is given to cells
that have large volumes but have not been well-explored. After each iteration, the selected cell
c is penalized in order to ensure that other cells will eventually be selected for expansion. This is
necessary to avoid oversampling and guarantee probabilistic completeness (Ladd & Kavraki, 2005).
PDST has also been combined with artificial potential fields in order to expand the tree from the
region with the lowest potential (Bekris & Kavraki, 2007).
3.4 Roadmap-Based Robot Motion Planning Methods
The introduction of PRM (Kavraki et al., 1996) shifted the focus from complete to probabilisticallycomplete motion-planning algorithms, which guarantee to find a solution, when it exists, with probability approaching one as time tends to infinity. While complete algorithms were limited to simple
problems with 23 variables, PRM made it possible to efficiently solve high-dimensional problems. The underlying idea in PRM is to construct a roadmap which captures the connectivity
of the (obstacle-)free configuration space. The roadmap is populated by generating a number of
collision-free configurations. Each configuration is generated by sampling values for the variables
uniformly at random. The configuration is discarded, if it results in collision. Otherwise, it is added
to the roadmap. To capture the connectivity, neighboring roadmap configurations are connected
with collision-free paths. Figure 7 provides an illustration of a roadmap created by PRM. A common approach is to compute for each roadmap configuration its k-nearest neighbors according to a
distance metric. A path between two configurations is often obtained by linear interpolation. If the
path is collision free, it is added as an edge to the roadmap graph. A path from a given start to a
goal configuration is found by first connecting the start and the goal configurations to the roadmap
and then searching the roadmap graph. A* is often used to efficiently compute the shortest roadmap
path. Additional sampling may be required when the initial roadmap does not contain a path from
the start to the goal.
532

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

b
b

b
b

b
b
b

b
b

b

b
b

b

b

b
b

b

goal

b

start

b
b
b

Figure 7: An illustration of a roadmap that can be used to answer start-to-goal queries.

Over the years, numerous strategies have been proposed to enhance the sampling in PRM.
Obstacle-based PRM (OBPRM) (Amato, Bayazit, Dale, Jones, & Vallejo, 1998) seeks to increase
sampling near obstacles in order to improve the connectivity inside narrow passages. BridgePRM
(Sun, Hsu, Jiang, Kurniawati, & Reif, 2005) has a similar objective but uses a bridge test to generate
samples halfway between two obstacles. Machine learning has also been used in conjunction with
a portfolio of samplers to enhance sampling in narrow passages (Hsu, Sanchez-Ante, & Sun, 2005).
The region-sensitive adaptive PRM (RESAMPL) (Rodriguez, Thomas, Pearce, & Amato, 2006a)
uses the notion of entropy to identify regions that can enhance sampling. TogglePRM (Denny &
Amato, 2013) switches between the free configuration space and the obstacle space in order to facilitate connections in narrow passages. ANC-Spatial (Ekenna, Thomas, & Amato, 2016) uses a
spatial-learning approach to enhance the roadmap connectivity by determining appropriate connection methods for each roadmap vertex. PRM* (Karaman & Frazzoli, 2011) is a variant of PRM that
leads to optimal solutions with respect to a given cost function. The modification is surprisingly
simple, as it requires only using a variable number of nearest neighbors instead of a fixed k.
3.5 Biomolecular Modeling Challenges for Tree- and Roadmap-Based Methods
Both tree- and roadmap-based methods experience the curse of dimensionality in several ways. A
central issue concerns the breadth of sampling in possibly high-dimensional and complex variable
spaces. In particular, in the context of biomolecular modeling, the decision of which variables to
represent is key, as it determines the dimensionality and complexity of the variable/conformation
space. This decision is tightly tied with the application setting or the class of biomolecular systems
considered. As reviewed in Section 2, while in many adaptations the selected variables are all or a
subset of the backbone dihedral angles (Han & Amato, 2001; Amato et al., 2003; Song & Amato,
2004; Thomas et al., 2005, 2007; Jaillet et al., 2008; Tang et al., 2008; Tapia, Tang, Thomas, &
Amato, 2007; Tapia et al., 2010; Jaillet et al., 2011; Shehu & Olson, 2010; Molloy et al., 2013;
Molloy & Shehu, 2013), in others the selected variables capture collective motions of atoms in the
3d Cartesian space (Kim et al., 2002b, 2002a; Kirillova et al., 2008; Schuyler et al., 2009; Al-Bluwi
et al., 2013; Maximova et al., 2015). Whether values for variables are sampled individually or in
533

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

tandem from a-priori compiled databases of good moves (Shehu & Olson, 2010; Molloy et al.,
2013; Molloy & Shehu, 2013), or whether diverse perturbation/sampling operators are employed
that make use of different sets of variables (Gipson, Moll, & Kavraki, 2013; Molloy & Shehu, 2016),
the dimensionality and size of the variable space remains a key challenge for tree- and roadmapbased treatments of biomolecules.
The choice of variables is key to the design of effective sampling or perturbation operators for
generating conformations that satisfy a set of desired geometric and/or energetic constraints for the
biomolecular modeling problem at hand. Samples obtained uniformly at random have very low
probability of being low-energy or in the region of interest for a sought structural transition. In
particular, for long protein chains with hundreds or more backbone dihedral angles, a conformation
sampled at random is highly unlikely to be physically-realistic.
Biased sampling techniques can be used to remedy this issue (Amato et al., 2003; Song &
Amato, 2004), but it is hard to know a priori which perturbation operators will be effective. Recent work recognizes this issue and addresses it by offering diverse sampling operators on possibly
diverse sets of variables (Raveh et al., 2009; Gipson et al., 2013; Molloy & Shehu, 2016). In particular, the work of Molloy and Shehu (2016) implements a probabilistic scheme that selects among a
rich menu of operators making use of angular or Cartesian variables.
It is worth noting that sampling operators may generate samples not in a vacuum but by incremental modifications of existing samples. While earlier generations of tree- and roadmapbased methods typically obtained new conformations by sampling values over the selected variables (Singh et al., 1999), recent methods generate samples in neighborhoods of existing parent
samples (Shehu & Olson, 2010; Molloy & Shehu, 2013; Maximova et al., 2016) (hence, the often
used term perturbation operator). This later strategy has a higher chance of yielding physicallyrealistic conformations, as perturbation operators that perturb a selected sample to obtain a new one
tend to preserve some good structural features in the new sample while introducing enough change
to explore new regions of the variable space (Olson, Hashmi, Molloy, & Shehu, 2012). In the context
of perturbation operators, selection schemes are critical to control sampling. A recent phenomenon
in robotics-inspired methods has been the recognition that selection schemes, which are central to
hierarchical tree-based robot motion planning (as reviewed above), can also be employed in both
tree- and roadmap-based methods to steer biomolecular sampling to regions of interest (Shehu &
Olson, 2010; Molloy & Shehu, 2013; Maximova et al., 2016).
An additional challenge with ensuring high sampling capability is that biomolecules have underlying complex energy surfaces that encode energetic constraints. Therefore, the criterion for
accepting a sampled conformation and adding it to the vertex list of the tree or roadmap needs to either rely on an a-priori set energy threshold or be probabilistic in nature. The latter setting provides
a balance between obtaining low-energy conformations while allowing a particular algorithm to go
over high-energy barriers as needed to sample more of the conformation space (Jaillet et al., 2008,
2011; Molloy & Shehu, 2013; Devaurs et al., 2015; Molloy & Shehu, 2016).
Both roadmap- and tree-based methods rely on local planners or local deformation techniques
to connect neighboring conformations. In tree-based methods that push the tree out in the variable
space by generating child conformations from selected parent conformations via perturbation operators, the child becomes a neighbor of the selected parent; the neighborhood function does not rely
on the notion of a distance in the variable space but is instead tied to the parent-child relationship.
In other methods, a sampled conformation needs to be connected to one or more nearest neighbors. Nearest-neighbor calculations need specification of a distance function between conforma534

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

tions, which is non-trivial in high-dimensional spaces. Most adaptations employ least Root-MeanSquared-Deviation (lRMSD), which is a modification of Euclidean distance after differences due to
rigid-body motions have been removed through optimal superimposition of the protein conformations under comparison (McLachlan, 1972). lRMSD is carried out over Cartesian coordinate-based
instantiations. Other distance functions use L1 or related variants defined over dihedral angles.
It is generally challenging to find computationally-efficient and dynamics-integrating local planners for biomolecular conformations. If conformations q1 and q2 are nearby in variable or structure
space, the local path that is encoded with an edge in the tree or roadmap should encode the process
of diffusion. The local path should provide evidence of the diffusion of the biomolecule from q1 to
q2 in the presence of thermal vibrations. It is not readily obvious how to use dynamics to steer a
biomolecule from q1 to q2 . While in principle MD simulations can be employed in search of such
paths, there is no guarantee that these simulations will reach q2 . While biased MD simulations can
be employed to reach q2 , such simulations modify the energy surface and do not model the actual
dynamics (Ma & Karplus, 1997). Moreover, any corrections to biased MD simulations to model the
actual dynamics prove computationally expensive (Ovchinnikov & Karplus, 2012) in the context of
robotics-inspired methods that evaluate thousands of edges.
As a result, the majority of robotics-inspired methods for biomolecular modeling employ local
planners that carry out linear interpolations over the variables of the conformations that need to be
connected via a tree branch or roadmap edge. Such planners produce unrealistic conformations, and
significant time can be spent correcting geometry and other ensuing energetic violations via energy
minimization. Recent work proposes complex, local planners that are not based on interpolation
but are instead re-formulations of the motion computation problem; that is, the local planners themselves are tree- or roadmap-based methods (Molloy & Shehu, 2016). The latter idea is borrowed
from the similarly challenging setting of motion planning for manipulators, where linear interpolation is also not effective (Nielsen & Kavraki, 2000). When making use of complex local planners,
a prioritized path sampling scheme is needed to prioritize the application of these computationallydemanding planners on the most promising paths in order to control computational cost (Nielsen &
Kavraki, 2000). The work of Molloy and Shehu (2016) provides an implementation of prioritized
path sampling for biomolecular modeling.

4. Robotics-Inspired Methods for Equilibrium Biomolecular Structure and
Dynamics
Table 1 categorizes different robotics-inspired methods by the robot motion planning frameworks
they adapt and the application setups they address. The table is not comprehensive by any means,
but it may be useful to readers selecting to focus on specific applications. In the rest of this Section
we describe these methods in greater detail, paying particular attention to recent, state-of-the-art
methods that showcase the current capabilities of robotics-inspired treatments of biomolecules.
4.1 Tree-Based Methods for Modeling Equilibrium Biomolecular Structure and Dynamics
Tree-based methods have been employed to model biomolecular flexibility and compute conformation paths connecting given structures (Cortes et al., 2005; Shehu, 2009; Shehu & Olson, 2010;
Jaillet et al., 2011; Haspel et al., 2010). Some tree-based methods address decoy sampling for the de
novo protein structure prediction problem (Shehu & Olson, 2010; Olson, Molloy, Hendi, & Shehu,
2012; Molloy et al., 2013) and map the entire energy landscape and pathways connecting stable
535

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

states in molecular loops, peptides, and proteins (Porta, Thomas, Corcho, Canto, & Perez, 2007;
Jaillet et al., 2011; Porta & Jaillet, 2013; Devaurs et al., 2015; Molloy et al., 2016). Others have
focused on specific flexible sub-chains, such as loops, rather than entire protein chains (Cortes et al.,
2004, 2005; Yao, Dhanik, Marz, Propper, Kou, Liu, van den Bedem, Latombe, Halperin-Landsberg,
& Altman, 2008; Barbe, Cortes, Simeon, Monsan, Remaud-Simeon, & Andre, 2011).
Table 1: Categorization of of Tree- and Roadmap-based Methods by Application Setting
Application
Protein
Loop
Motions
Protein-Ligand
Binding

Tree-based Methods
RLG-RRT (Cortes et al., 2005; Cortes,
Jaillet, & Simeon, 2007), ML-RRT (Barbe
et al., 2011)
ML-RRT (Cortes et al., 2007)

Protein Structure
Prediction
Protein and RNA
(Un)Folding

FeLTr (Shehu & Olson, 2010; Molloy
et al., 2013)

Peptide and Protein
Structural
Transitions

NMA-RRT (Kirillova et al., 2008; AlBluwi et al., 2013), PathRover (Enosh,
Raveh, Furman-Schueler, Halperin, &
Ben-Tal, 2008; Raveh et al., 2009), TRRT (Jaillet et al., 2011), PDST (Haspel
et al., 2010), Sprint (Molloy & Shehu,
2013), Multi-T-RRT (Devaurs et al., 2015)
T-RRT (Jaillet et al., 2011), Multi-TRRT (Devaurs et al., 2015)

Peptide and Protein Energy landscape Mapping

Roadmap-based Methods
LoopTK (Yao et al., 2008)

PCR (Singh et al., 1999; Apaydin
et al., 2001), SRS (Apaydin et al.,
2003)

SRS (Apaydin et al., 2003), PRMFP (Amato et al., 2003; Song &
Amato, 2004; Tang, Kirkpatrick,
Thomas, Song, & Amato, 2005;
Thomas et al., 2005, 2007; Tapia
et al., 2007; Tang et al., 2008; Tapia
et al., 2010), MaxFlux-PRM (Yang,
Wu, Li, Han, & Huo, 2007; Li, Yang,
Han, & Huo, 2008)
SRS (Molloy et al., 2016), Spiral (Molloy & Shehu, 2016), SoPRIM (Maximova et al., 2015)

SoPRIM (Maximova et al., 2015)

4.1.1 M ODELING P ROTEIN L OOP M OTIONS AND P ROTEIN -L IGAND D ISASSOCIATION
Early adaptations of the RRT algorithm for biomolecules focused on modeling the equilibrium dynamics of protein loops (Cortes et al., 2005) and protein-ligand interactions (Cortes et al., 2004).
For instance, the method presented in the work of Cortes et al. (2005) proceeds in two stages to
model large-amplitude structural changes in a protein loop at equilibrium. The first stage obtains an
ensemble of collision-free conformations of a loop in a protein structure. This is achieved through
the Random Loop Generator RRT (RLG-RRT) algorithm, which effectively samples the loop conformation space that satisfies kinematic closure constraints. The loop is divided into an active and a
passive part. The passive part is selected to contain 6 variables, whereas the active part contains the
rest of the angular variables selected to represent a loop conformation. The RLG-RRT algorithm
536

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

directly samples values for the variables in the active part via a scheme that increases the probability
of obtaining a conformation that satisfies loop closure. Once the active part of a loop conformation
has been obtained, an exact 6R inverse kinematics technique is applied to solve for the passive variables under the loop closure constraints. Closed loop conformations are added to the tree if they
are collision-free. The tree is run for a fixed amount of time, and a goal region is defined around
the given goal conformation in order to extract many paths from one execution of the RLG-RRT
algorithm. Conformations in extracted paths are then subjected to short energetic minimizations in
order to elucidate energetically-feasible, large-amplitude motions of the loop under investigation.
Analysis of extracted loop motions in the work of Cortes et al. (2004) reveals that results are
comparable with classic molecular modeling methods while obtained with a performance gain of
several orders of magnitude. The work of Cortes et al. (2004) demonstrates the efficacy of the twostage approach for studying the activity-regulating mobility of the 17-residue long loop 7 in the
amylosucrase enzyme from Neisseria polysaccharea.
Ideas similar to RLG-RRT are employed in the LoopTK (toolkit) algorithm (Yao et al., 2008)
to explore the closed, collision-free conformations of flexible loops ranging in length for 5 to 25
amino acids. The algorithm relies on an interplay of sampling and deformation to obtain loops that
satisfy the kinematic closure constraints and are collision-free. The sampling procedure focuses on
obtaining geometrically-diverse, closed loops. The deformation procedure is based on earlier related
work on loop modeling (Lotan, van den Bedem, Deacon, & Latombe, 2004; van den Bedem, Lotan,
Latombe, & Deacon, 2005). The procedure makes use of the null space technique to explore the
self-motion manifold (the constrained, closure space) around a closed loop to resolve steric clashes
while not violating the closure constraints. LoopTK is shown to efficiently handle long loops up
to 25 amino acids and even generate biologically-interesting, calcium-binding conformations. The
toolkit is available at https://simtk.org/home/looptk.
The time demands of RRT-RLG on problems with hundreds of variables are addressed by Cortes
et al. (2007) by proposing the Manhattan-like RRT (ML-RRT) algorithm to efficiently compute
paths for a small protein-bound ligand to exit the protein active site. ML-RRT borrows ideas from
mechanical disassembly and divides the variables into two groups, active and passive. In particular,
the variables that model the internal and rigid-body motions of the ligand are designated as active,
and the subspace of these active variables is sampled as in the RLG-RRT algorithm. The variables
that model the internal motions of amino acids on the protein receptors active site are designated
as passive, and they are slightly perturbed if they hinder motions of the ligand. This decoupling
proves effective, as it allows for possible ensuing collisions between the ligand and the protein to be
addressed in a domino-like scheme, as illustrated in Figure 8.
ML-RRT has been shown to efficiently model motions of small ligands, side chains, loops, and
backbone (Cortes, Le, Lehl, & Simeon, 2010; Barbe et al., 2011). The work of Cortes et al. (2010)
subjects paths extracted from executions of the ML-RRT algorithm to a randomized path smoothing
post-processing technique. The technique is carried out in the composite space of all the parameters
resulting in simultaneous motions of the ligand and the protein in the final path. The work of Barbe
et al. (2011) subjects loop conformations in paths extracted from ML-RRT to minimization of an
MM energy function so as to reveal critical, physically-realistic intermediate conformations and
bottlenecks along the open-to-closed loop motion of the Burkholderia cepacia lipase lid domain.
Adaptations of robot motion planning frameworks to model loop structures and motions represent only a fraction of diverse methods designed for loop modeling. Interested readers are referred
to a survey in the work of Shehu and Kavraki (2012).
537

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

Figure 8: This figure is reproduced from the work of Al-Bluwi et al. (2012). The left panel illustrates the disassembly planning problem for two articulated objects. The ML-RRT algorithm proposed in the work of Cortes
et al. (2007) problem models the escape of a ligand from a proteins binding site as disassembly problem. The
red H-shaped object on the left image can be considered as the ligand in the right image, and the blue sticks
in the left image can be considered as the flexible side chains on the binding site of the receptor protein in the
right image. The figure is reproduced with permission of the Computer Science Review Journal.

4.1.2 M ODELING P EPTIDE AND P ROTEIN S TRUCTURAL T RANSITIONS AND M APPING
P EPTIDE E NERGY L ANDSCAPES
The RLG-RRT algorithm is modified in the work of Enosh et al. (2008) to model structural transitions in proteins and, in particular, model open and close motions in potassium channels. The main
modification to the RLG-RRT algorithm by Enosh et al. concerns the addition of an energetic test
to the collision-free test performed before deciding whether a generated conformation should be
added to the tree. Several novel analysis techniques are introduced. Clustering is conducted over
many paths obtained from several executions of the algorithm in order to identify common intermediate conformations in the paths connecting given start and goal conformations. Path alignment
is employed to obtain the most energetically-favored path among all those computed. A schematic
of the method proposed by Enosh et al. and a visualization of the most energetically-favored path
obtained on the KscA protein are shown in Figure 9.
Another extension of the RRT-based algorithm in the work of Enosh et al. (2008) is presented
by Raveh et al. (2009); the more efficient PathRover algorithm is proposed for modeling structural
transitions on many proteins. PathRover achieves its computational efficiency in two main ways.
First, its application on many proteins is made possible by restricting the number of dihedral angles
used as variables. Three strategies are used to identify a subset of dihedral angles to define the
variable space: careful inspection of structures, relevant literature, computational tools for detecting
hinge regions like NMA, and comparison of structural changes in alternative (native or homologue)
structures. In particular, the FlexProt alignment algorithm (Shatsky, Nussinov, & Wolfson, 2002)
is used to compare start and goal structures and reveal structurally-different regions. Variables are
manually restricted to dihedral angles in such regions. Second, PathRover limits the exploration to
538

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

Figure 9: This figure is reproduced from the work of Enosh et al. (2008). The schematic of the method is
shown in (a). The PathRover algorithm is executed multiple times to extract 100 plausible paths connecting
the given open and closed conformations. The paths are clustered and aligned to reveal a path cluster with
minimal energy barrier. This cluster is visualized for the KscA protein in (b), which shows a putative threephase motion between the close and open conformations. This figure is reproduced with permission of the
Biophysical Journal.

539

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

regions of the space consistent with available wet-laboratory data. Branch termination criteria are
employed to stop the tree from being pulled towards regions that do not improve agreement with
wet-laboratory data. The integration of wet-laboratory data aims to circumvent known inaccuracies
of modern biomolecular energy functions.
The RRT-based algorithms summarized above demonstrate the utility of RRT for modeling
structural transitions in proteins. In particular, the PathRover algorithm utilized several schemes
to reduce the number of variables in order to make the problem of modeling structural transitions
tractable (Raveh et al., 2009). The work of Haspel et al. (2010) continued in this spirit via clever,
reduced representations of large proteins. In contrast, work in the Simeon and Cortes labs credited
with introducing RRT-based algorithms to biomolecular modeling focused instead on techniques to
enhance sampling. The Transition-RRT (T-RRT) algorithm proposed by Jaillet et al. (2008) was
shown particularly effective in this regard.
T-RRT and its bi- and multi-tree variants have been recently proposed to explore and obtain comprehensive maps of energy landscapes of small peptides, such as dialanine and Met-Enkephalin (Jaillet et al., 2011; Devaurs et al., 2015). The main modification to the baseline RRT algorithm in
T-RRT concerns the introduction in the acceptance criterion of a state transition test based on the
Metropolis criterion. New conformations are added to the tree if they pass the transition test (hence
the name, T-RRT). The goal in T-RRT is to steer the tree towards exploration of low-energy regions
in order to map energy minima in the potential energy surface while relaxing the transition test as
needed to cross energy barriers that may trap the exploration to a particular local minimum.
The dynamic modification of the state transition test makes use of a reactive temperature scheme.
In the Metropolis criterion, an effective temperature effectively controls the height of energy barriers that can be crossed by two consecutive conformations. In T-RRT, this temperature is increased
when the number of attempts to pull the tree towards low-energy regions reaches a user-specified
threshold; that is, the number of failures to grow the tree is taken as an indication of the presence of
an energy barrier, and the effective temperature is increased in order to relax the state transition test.
As soon as a successful edge is added to the tree, the temperature is then lowered by a pre-specified
factor in order to resume the overall bias of pulling the tree towards local minima. The effect of
this reactive temperature scheme is that the search is balanced between unexplored regions and lowenergy regions of the variable space. Application of T-RRT in the work of Jaillet et al. (2011) shows
that the algorithm can map the entire known energy landscape of the dialanine peptide when run in
an exploration mode. Another setting, where T-RRT is used to obtain paths that connect discovered
minima, also shows that recovered transitions between known stable states of dialanine are in strong
agreement with transitions known from experiment and affirmed in other simulation studies.
Further work addresses the issue of limited sampling when the goal is to obtain accurate representations of energy landscapes of longer peptides, such as Met-Enkephalin (Devaurs et al., 2015).
The T-RRT algorithm is used by Devaurs et al. only to reveal conformation paths connecting
already-identified meta-stable states. These states are identified by an EA known as Basin Hopping (BH), which has been shown to effectively sample local minima of the energy surfaces of
biomolecules (Olson et al., 2012). In the work of Devaurs et al., BH operates over dihedral angles
and provides a sample-based, discrete representation of the energy surface of a peptide. The local
minima are clustered to reveal wide basins corresponding to meta-stable states.
A variant of the T-RRT algorithm, referred to as Multi-T-RRT, is also proposed by Devaurs et al.
to connect all identified states. The algorithm builds n single trees, each rooted at a conformation
representative of a unique meta-stable state. The algorithm proceeds in iterations, at each iteration
540

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

Figure 10: In this figure, reproduced from the work of Devaurs et al. (2015), the graph obtained from a single
run of multi-T-RRT with cycles is projected over key dihedral angles in the top panel. The algorithm is seeded
with four meta-stable states of the Met-Enkephalin peptide, drawn as pink triangles, squares, or circles. The
states capture the unfolded state, the folded state, and two intermediates (shown in the bottom panel). Costs
of various paths are shown in the table on the bottom panel. This figure is reproduced with permission of IEEE
Trans Nano BioScience 2015.

randomly selecting one of the n trees for expansion with a conformation q. The conformation
nearest to q in any of the other n  1 trees is identified, and if it is within an extension step-size,
q merges two trees. Iterations continue until all trees are merged in a graph. The graph is queried
for minimum-cost paths connecting any states of interest. The identified meta-stable states and the
minimum-cost paths connecting these states are found to be comparable to those reported by other
studies that employ more computationally-demanding exploration strategies (Devaurs et al., 2015).
A representative result of the information that can be extracted from this combination of BH and
Multi-T-RRT is shown in Figure 10.
One limitation of readily applying T-RRT and its variants to obtain similar, detailed characterization for proteins rather than short peptides is the dimensionality of the conformation space. In the
work of Jaillet et al. (2011), this space has few dimensions due to the limited number of dihedral
angles in small peptides, such as dialanine and Met-Enkephalin. Detail, while desired and possible
on characterizations of short peptides, needs to be sacrificed in order to model large-scale structural transitions in proteins. NMA-RRT (Kirillova et al., 2008), PDST (Haspel et al., 2010), and
Sprint (Molloy & Shehu, 2013) present three different algorithms that make use of representations
of reduced detail to model large-scale structural transitions in proteins.
Normal Mode Analysis (NMA) is used to obtain larger-scale moves (low-frequency modes revealed by the NMA on a conformation) (Kirillova et al., 2008). These moves are then employed to
generate new conformations in the RRT framework. The NMA-RRT algorithm proposed by Kirillova et al. (2008) essentially conducts the RRT search over a low-dimensional variable space of
541

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

the low-frequency modes. Since the normal modes provided by the NMA on a conformation only
allow to get out of the local minimum represented by a conformation, NMA needs to be repeated
regularly during the RRT search in order to explore the breadth of the conformation space. This can
be computationally demanding, and application of NMA-RRT is limited to extraction of minimumcost paths connecting two conformations of interest rather than a comprehensive map of the energy
landscape and its connectivity in proteins. The work of Kirillova et al. shows that precious information can be extracted regarding structural transitions in proteins, such as adenylate kinase, even
when focusing on motions largely driven by normal modes. A complementary study of minimal
energy paths in adenylate kinase via NMA (Maragakis & Karplus, 2005) shows that the modes are
sufficient to capture the structural transition between the open and closed structures in this protein; all known wet-lab structures are found to be within 3.0Aof these mode-based minimal energy
pathways (Maragakis & Karplus, 2005).
A recent extension of NMA-RRT aims to reduce the computational demands of the algorithm.
The extension employs a further reduced representation of a protein chain based on tripeptides and
employs NMA on conformations of such reduced representations. The reactive temperature scheme
in T-RRT is employed to broaden sampling and capture large-scale motions connecting significantly
different structural states in large proteins of several hundred amino acids (Al-Bluwi et al., 2013).
Employing reduced representations has expanded the applicability of tree-based algorithms for
treating large biomolecules. The PDST algorithm is adapted by Haspel et al. (2010) to model a
transition between two structures of interest in large proteins of more than 200 amino acids. The
assumption is made that secondary structures do not unfold in the sought transition, which is largely
valid when modeling domain motions in proteins. Under this assumption, only backbone dihedral
angles on loops connecting secondary structures are selected as variables.
In the work of Haspel et al. (2010), a bias scheme is used on 10% of the iterations to steer
the tree towards the goal conformation. The bias scheme employs a Euclidean distance between
feature vector representations of conformations in the tree. Given a conformation, its corresponding
feature vector contains Euclidean distances between centers of mass of its secondary structure units.
Conformations are evaluated through a detailed coarse-grained energy function that combines terms
from the energy function used in the work of Shehu et al. (2009) and the Amber ff03 energy function.
If a sampled conformation is evaluated to have energy above a set threshold of 100 kcal/mol more
of the energy of the start conformation, the conformation is subjected to 20 steps of steepest descent
and retained only if its energy decreases below this threshold. This is a rather coarse energetic
constraint, but paths collected from 100 runs of the algorithm not only reach the goal conformation
in less time than methods based on Simulated Annealing, but also reveal credible motions consistent
with experimental data on large, well-characterized proteins such as GroEL (Haspel et al., 2010).
The Sprint algorithm proposed by Molloy and Shehu (2013) uses a complementary approach to
simplifying the search space explored for paths connecting given structures of medium-size proteins.
Sprint addresses the issue of sampling in high-dimensional variable spaces by employing a popular
idea from de novo structure prediction. The fragment replacement technique is used to divide a
protein chain into bundles of consecutive dihedral angles, and values for a bundle or fragment are
sampled from an a-priori constructed database of fragment configurations on known, native protein
structures. The fragment replacement technique is used to expand the tree at every iteration.
While the work of Molloy and Shehu (2013) adapts the EST framework via this expansion
procedure to model structural transitions in small- and medium-size proteins, the Fragment Monte
Carlo Tree Exploration (FeLTr) algorithm proposed by Shehu and Olson (2010) uses related con542

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

cepts to sample the space of near-native protein conformations for the purpose of de novo structure
prediction in small proteins.
In both Sprint and FeLTr, a state-transition test is used to steer the tree towards low-energy conformations over time; that is, a probabilistic, Metropolis-like criterion is used to determine whether
a child conformation should be added to the tree. While in FeLTr (Shehu & Olson, 2010) a fixed
scaling parameter (analogous to a fixed effective temperature) is used in the Metropolis-like criterion, Sprint (Molloy & Shehu, 2013) integrates a reactive temperature scheme in order to allow
the tree to go over high-energy regions when no low-energy routes can be found and thus expand
exploration capability. The reactive temperature scheme in Sprint is slightly different from that in
T-RRT (Jaillet et al., 2008). While in T-RRT the effective temperature is increased or decreased by
fixed amounts, Sprint moves temperature along a proportional cooling scheme often employed in
Simulated Annealing Monte Carlo methods (Shehu et al., 2009). Upon failures to expand the tree,
temperature moves up to the next value in the cooling scheme; upon successes, temperature goes
down to the next value in this scheme.
Both FeLTr and Sprint operationalize on the idea that it is easier to push rather than pull
the tree in conformation space when good moves are available or compiled a priori to generate
energetically-feasible child conformations from selected parent conformations in the tree. While
in the work of Molloy and Shehu (2013) the tree is rooted at a given start conformation and the
goal is to get within a tolerance region of the given goal conformation, in the work of Shehu and
Olson (2010) the tree is rooted at an extended conformation, and the termination criterion is a compromise between a desired number of low-energy conformations and running time.
A central idea in both Sprint and FeLTr is that the growth of the tree can be controlled via a
selection mechanism; at each iteration, a conformation in the tree is selected for expansion. The
selection penalizes the tree from growing towards regions of the conformation space that have been
oversampled, thus resulting in enhanced sampling of the conformation space. Two discretization
layers are employed. In FeLTr, the first layer maps conformations in the tree on a 1d grid whose
cells are energy levels of width 2 kcal/mol. In Sprint, the first layer maps conformations on a 1d
grid based on their lRMSD from the goal conformation. The second layer in both algorithms maps
conformations over a geometric projection. The second layer is a 3d grid, where conformations are
associated with 3 shape-based global coordinates (Shehu & Olson, 2010).
The selection mechanism uses both discretization layers. First, it selects an energy level according to a probability distribution function. The latter is defined over weights associated with energy
levels according to some weighting function. Different weighting functions are analyzed for how
strong a global energetic bias needs to be in order to reproduce the native structure (Molloy et al.,
2013). Once an energy level is selected, cells of the geometric projection grid that belong to conformations in the selected energy level are analyzed. A second weighting function over cells of the grid
biases against selecting a cell that has been selected many times before and/or already has many conformations in it. Once a cell is selected, any conformation in it is selected for expansion uniformly
at random, since conformations in a cell are energetically- and geometrically-indistinguishable.
Extensions of FeLTr have explored both the effect of different weighting functions over the
discretization layers and the employment of different projection coordinates (Molloy et al., 2013;
Olson et al., 2012). Different coarse-grained energy functions that are considered state-of-the-art
in de novo structure prediction, including the Rosetta suite of energy functions, are employed in
the framework and directly compared for how they steer the search towards near-native conformations (Molloy et al., 2013). Molloy and Shehu (2013) also investigate the impact of different
543

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

projection schemes and selection mechanisms on both the diversity and energetic profiles of Sprintextracted paths in the context of computing structural transitions.
Applications of Sprint on different start and goal structure pairs of the calmodulin and adenylate
kinase proteins show that the algorithm is able to find paths that reach the goal conformation (Molloy
& Shehu, 2013). Soft global biasing schemes are found to provide the right compromise between
tree depth (that is, lower energies) and diversity of paths (that is, geometrically-diverse conformations). Detailed energetic and structural analysis on computed paths for two hallmark proteins,
such as calmodulin and adenylate kinase, reveals that Sprint yields accurate characterizations of
structural transitions in these proteins. Energetic profiles of extracted paths indicate the presence
of high-energy regions that need to be crossed on specific transitions in calmodulin, in agreement
with wet-laboratory characterizations. Analysis on adenylate kinase shows that known intermediate
structures of this protein are present in the the conformation paths computed by Sprint (Molloy &
Shehu, 2013).
4.2 Roadmap-Based Methods for Modeling Equilibrium Biomolecular Structure and
Dynamics
Roadmap-based methods have been employed to model protein-ligand binding (Singh et al., 1999),
protein and RNA folding and unfolding (Song & Amato, 2004; Chiang et al., 2007; Chiang, Hsu, &
C., 2010), and protein structural transitions (Molloy & Shehu, 2016; Maximova et al., 2015).
4.2.1 M ODELING P ROTEIN -L IGAND B INDING
The adaptation of the roadmap-based motion planning framework for protein-ligand binding by
Singh et al. (1999) is the first occurrence of robotics-inspired treatments of biomolecular structure
and dynamics. The adaptation was simplistic but provided key design issues that were then replicated and extended by many robotics researchers. One of the key simplifications is that the protein
receptor is kept rigid, and the only variables of interest are those allowing to model rigid-body
motions of the ligand around the receptor and internal motions of the ligand. Small ligands are
considered, so that the 6 + p variables to allow modeling of such motions do not go above a dozen.
Sampling proceeds uniformly at random over the 6 + p variables, but ligand configurations added
to the roadmap pass a geometric and energetic criterion. The geometric criterion ensures that ligand
configurations are within some predefined distance of the center of mass of the receptor.
The energetic criterion is probabilistic: two dynamically-updated thresholds, Emin and Emax
values, corresponding to minimum and maximum energy values over sampled configurations, are
recorded. Ligand configurations with energy higher than Emax are rejected. Other configurations
are retained with probability (Emax  E(q))/(Emax  Emin ). The energy function incorporates
both terms to evaluate the internal energy of a ligand configuration as well as terms evaluating
interactions between a ligand configuration and the rigid protein receptor.
Retained ligand configurations are embedded in a nearest-neighbor graph, using lRMSD to measure the distance between two ligand configurations and a user-set parameter, k, for the number of
nearest neighbors. A simple local planner interpolating over all p + 6 variables of two neighboring
configurations is used to estimate the feasibility of q  q 0 and q 0  q edges by generating consecutive configurations. Consecutive configurations qi are generated by the linear interpolation planner
to connect q and q 0 until the distance between two consecutive configurations in the generated series is no higher than 1A. The q  q 0 and q 0  q edges are added to the roadmap only if all qi
544

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

configurations have energies below Emax . Weights are added to retained edges as follows:
0

w(q  q ) = 

s1
X

log[P (qi  qi+1 )]

i=0

where
P (qi  qi+1 ) =

e(Ei+1 Ei )/(KB T )
(e(Ei+1 Ei )/(KB T ) + e(Ei1 Ei )/(KB T ) )

In the above equations, qi1 , qi , qi+1 are three consecutive configurations with corresponding
energies Ei1 , Ei , Ei+1 , KB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the effective temperature. The
weight of a path qstart
qgoal , which connects a start configuration to a goal configuration, is
then the sum of the weights of the edges in it. The weight of a path initiated at an unbound configuration and terminating in a bound configuration estimates the association rate (the cost of the
ligand approaching and binding to the protein receptor). The weight of the reverse path estimates
the disassociation rate (the cost of the ligand leaving the binding site and diffusing in space).
The resulting roadmap represents a distribution of energetically-credible paths of the ligand approaching and then binding the receptor. In the work of Singh et al. (1999), the bound configuration
of the ligand in the p+6 variable space is presumed not to be known, and RMSD-based clustering of
sampled lowest-energy ligand configurations is employed to reveal a few likely bound candidates.
Analysis reveals that the true bound configuration is indeed present in the top-populated clusters;
however, many false positives are reported, as well. Weights of paths terminating in and initiated
from the lowest-energy ligand configurations are analyzed in order to determine what other characteristics can be used to discriminate between true and false positives. Paths terminating at the true,
bound configurations are found to have high association rates; the reverse paths are found to have
high disassociation rates. This important result elucidates that effective binders are not only those
that allow the ligand to reach the lowest interaction energy but also trap it at the binding site via
high-energy barriers.
4.2.2 M ODELING P ROTEIN AND RNA (U N )F OLDING
Singh et al. (1999) provided a much needed template and has served as the foundation for many
robotics-inspired treatments of biomolecules. In particular, a suite of roadmap-based algorithms
and extensions were designed in the Amato lab to model unfolding of small proteins. A review
of roadmap-based methods to study molecular motions in the Amato lab is available in the work
of Tapia et al. (2010), whereas a review of roadmap-based methods for the specific protein folding
problem is presented in the work of Moll, Schwartz, and Kavraki (2008). A seminal contribution in
this category is the Probabilistic Conformation Roadmap (PCR) algorithm (Apaydin et al., 2001),
which builds upon the template presented by Singh et al. (1999) to study protein folding.
PCR addresses a complex application domain, as the number of variables needed to model the
intrinsic flexibility of protein chains can easily reach 100 or more. In PCR and other extensions that
followed, most notably in the Amato lab, the variables employed are all or a subset of the backbone
dihedral angles of a protein chain (Amato et al., 2003; Song & Amato, 2004; Tang et al., 2005;
Thomas et al., 2005, 2007; Tapia et al., 2007; Tang et al., 2008; Tapia et al., 2010). In such variable
spaces, uniform random sampling is ineffective and likely to result in conformations with severe
internal collisions. For this reason, work in the Amato lab on PCR-based algorithms has gradually
545

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

shifted to sampling strategies based on incremental perturbations of a given native/folded conformation until memory of the folded conformation has been lost. Specifically, backbone dihedral angles
of the folded conformation are perturbed by small amounts by use of a Gaussian distribution until
a minimum number of conformations is obtained for each category (0 to 100% in 10% increments)
of the percentage of native contacts. The lower the number of native contacts is in a conformation,
the more likely that conformation is to belong to the unfolded state. While the acceptance criterion
for sampled conformations is as in the work of Singh et al. (1999), the energy function is different,
as it measures the internal energy of a protein chain. The function contains terms favoring hydrogen
bonds, disulfide bonds, and hydrophobic interactions.
The sampled conformations that pass the energetic/acceptance criterion are embedded in a
nearest-neighbor graph, with the number of nearest neighbor conformation k specified by the user.
In contrast to the original PCR algorithm, directed (u, v) edges in the graph are weighted based on
E(u)E(v)

the Boltzmann-related Metropolis criterionas in: P(u,v) = e KB T , where E(.) is the energy of a
conformation, KB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is an a-priori set temperature determining the
height of energy barriers crossed by an edge. In this early formulation of edge weights, no reactive
temperature schemes are employed as in the later tree- and roadmap-based algorithms for structural
transitions. Instead, T is a user-controlled parameter that determines to a great extent the ability of
the algorithm to navigate the underlying energy surface.
In the works of Song and Amato (2004) and Thomas et al. (2005), all N best paths that end at the
folded conformation and start at conformations with 0 native contacts are extracted and analyzed.
Analysis of such paths has shown that, despite several design decisions intended to simplify the
protein folding problem, PCR-based algorithms can predict the order of secondary structure formation. Agreement with wet-laboratory data has validated the general usage of PCR-based algorithms
to provide a coarse-grained treatment of folding and unfolding pathways for protein chains. Other
works by Amato and collaborators also show the applicability of PCR-based algorithms to study
RNA folding and unfolding (Tapia et al., 2007; Tang et al., 2008; Tapia et al., 2010) .
The sampling strategy of incremental perturbations is effective on protein chains of no more than
60 amino acids (Song & Amato, 2004) but scales poorly on longer chains (Thomas et al., 2005).
Ensuing work improves sampling for protein chains up to 110 amino acids by further reducing the
number of variables modeled to represent conformations (Thomas et al., 2007). Specifically, rigidity analysis is employed to detect least-constrained regions in a given structure. The dihedral angles
belonging to such regions are selected more often for perturbation in the sampling stage. This modification is shown effective in revealing subtle folding differences between protein G and two of its
sequence variants. In particular, the modification is also shown to be promising for capturing other
dynamic events in proteins beyond folding to study large-scale conformational changes involved
in structural transitions of the calmodulin protein. Related ideas have been employed by other researchers to compute temperature-dependent optimal folding paths in peptides and proteins (Yang
et al., 2007; Li et al., 2008). The MaxFlux-PRM algorithm proposed by Yang et al. (2007) to
study structural transitions in the dialanine peptide and folding of a -hairpin is then shown by Li
et al. (2008) to be capable of predicting folding pathways of the engrailed homeodomain protein.
Further work in the Amato lab has focused on exploiting the conformation roadmap to extract
quantities summarizing folding kinetics in protein and RNA molecules. Tapia et al. (2007) introduce
two new analysis techniques, the Map-based Master Equation (MME) and Map-based MC (MMC)
technique. This work shows that treating the roadmap as a map of the folding landscape can be
546

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

exploited to estimate kinetic metrics that are typically only extracted from MD simulation studies.
Metropolis MC simulations can be conducted over the roadmap, moving between roadmap vertices
observing the edge probabilities in the roadmap. Different statistics can then be calculated over the
MMC walks, including folding rates and population kinetics. Tang et al. (2008) show that statistics
summarizing RNA folding predict well the same relative gene expression rate for wild-type MS2
phage RNA and three of its mutants, in good agreement with wet-laboratory data.
4.2.3 S TOCHASTIC ROADMAP S IMULATION AND M ARKOV S TATE M ODELS FOR M ODELING
P ROTEIN AND RNA (U N ) FOLDING AND P ROTEIN S TRUCTURAL T RANSITIONS
The idea that reliable statistics can be extracted from molecular conformation roadmaps was presented earlier by Latombe and colleagues (Apaydin et al., 2003). The stochastic roadmap simulation (SRS) framework is formalized in relation to a key analogy between a roadmap and a Markov
state model (MSM); the concept of a stochastic roadmap with probabilistic edges was presented
earlier (Song & Amato, 2000), but the analogy with an MSM went missing till the 2003 formalization by Latombe and colleagues (Apaydin et al., 2003). The latter laid bare the analogies between a stochastic roadmap and what would later be referred to as a point-based MSM. In such an
MSM, states of the MSM are the single-conformation vertices of the stochastic roadmap, and the
probabilistically-weighted edges connecting vertices in the roadmap are the state-to-state transitions
in the MSM. The analogy brought to focus that a stochastic roadmap better encodes the stochastic nature of biomolecular motions, and the analogy with an MSM could even be used to extract
interesting summary statistics regarding physics-driven stochastic processes.
In addition to recognizing that biased random walks can be carried out over the roadmap and
employed to extract statistics of interest (Tapia et al., 2007), the SRS-MSM analogy highlights that
effective, algebra-based techniques from (Markov chain) transition state theory can be employed to
extract average statistics without launching a single simulation (or random walk over the roadmap).
Folding rates, pfold values,  values, and other estimates of kinetics, such as transition rates, can be
obtained without needing to perform many random walks but by in-order propagation of transition
probabilities. The analogy between a stochastic roadmap and a point-based MSM is shown to result
in correctly-predicted pfold values on small proteins modeled at the secondary structure level with
612 variables (Apaydin, Brutlag, Hsu, & Latombe, 2002; Apaydin et al., 2003). Further work
demonstrated that the transition state ensemble (the set of conformations with pfold =0.5), folding
rates, and  values could be predicted on 16 different proteins but at a fraction of the computational
time that would be needed by a framework launching numerous MC simulations (Chiang, Apaydin,
Brutlag, Hsu, & Latombe, 2006; Chiang et al., 2007) .
While the SRS-MSM analogy permits interesting mathematics, practical issues such as how to
ensure that the transition matrix is not prohibitive in size to allow solving of linear algebra equations
have to be addressed on a case-by-case basis. The formalization presented by Apaydin et al. (2003)
did not discuss practical design decisions such as how to group conformations into states and how
to estimate transition probabilities between two sub-ensembles, but rather on the mathematics that
would be possible by the analogy between a stochastic roadmap and an MSM. Analogies with cellbased MSMs, where states are homogeneous sub-ensembles of conformations rather than single
conformations need addressing practical issues regarding how to organize conformations into states
and how to associate transition probabilities between states.
547

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

Since the seminal work of Apaydin et al. (2003), analogies between SRS and cell-based MSMs
have been largely limited, partly due to the lack of clear objectives in design decisions that are
general in their ability to transform a roadmap into an MSM of manageable size. For instance, the
fundamental assumption was that if conformations were obtained via an MD simulation at some
temperature T , then the probability of an edge representing a transition from a vertex u to a vertex v
could be measured via the Boltzmann-related Metropolis criterion e(E(v)E(u))/(KB T ) . This realization allowed Apaydin, Latombe, and colleagues to see the clear connection between the stochastic (probabilistic) roadmap of structures and a point-based MSM, with vertices seen as states of the
MSM and edges between vertices in the roadmap as transitions between states in the MSM. However, practical considerations as to how to convert these single conformation vertex probabilities
into state-state transition probabilities were not discussed.
The issue of how to associate probabilities in the first place to conformations sampled via other
non-MD algorithms was also not discussed. Two groups of researchers have started operationalizing
on the seminal ideas presented by Apaydin et al. (2003). Work by Latombe and colleagues has focused either on point-based MSMs or on summarizing and uncovering the MD-simulated dynamics
of synthetic and small peptides via cell-based MSMs (Chiang et al., 2007, 2010). Complementary work in the Shehu lab has focused on non-MD approaches and extracting average statistics
to model and compare transitions in healthy and aberrant forms of disease-participating, small- to
medium-size proteins (Molloy et al., 2016).
Chiang et al. (2010) offer a novel representation of states not as individual conformations (Apaydin et al., 2003; Singhal, Snow, & Pande, 2004) or even disjoint regions of conformation space
(Ozkan, Dill, & Bahar, 2002; Chodera, Singhal, Pande, Dill, & Swope, 2007) (as in cell-based
MSMs) but instead as overlapping probabilistic distributions over the conformation space. This
distribution relies on the key recognition that a single conformation does not contain enough information to be uniquely mapped to a state and leads to the presence of hidden states in what is
referred to as a Markov Dynamics Model (MDM) rather than an MSM (Chiang et al., 2010). In
the MDM, emission probabilities of hidden states measure the probability with which a conformation belongs to a state. Both transition and emission probabilities are estimated over trajectories of
conformations obtained from many MD simulation trajectories. A principled criterion based on the
ability of a model to predict long-timescale kinetics allows discriminating between possible MDMs
and selecting an optimal one. The MDM embedded over conformations obtained from MD trajectories simulating folding of the fast-folding villin headpiece subdomain (HP-35 NleNle) is shown
in Figure 11. The MDM presents a highly-interpretable discrete kinetic model of the folding of this
small sub-domain, built over more than 400 MD trajectories, each 1s long. Figure 11 shows that
a few states, 7, 12, 13, 15 and 18, are the most frequently-visited states that significantly influence
the long-term dynamics.
Molloy et al. (2016) present strategies to embed conformations sampled via a non-MD method
in a cell-based MSM. The ability to formulate a cell-based MSM relies on dense sampling of the
conformation space of interest. The latter provides significantly challenging to do in the MD setting
or even in the robotics-inspired setting. Instead, complementary work in the Shehu lab on EAs is
used to obtain a rich ensemble of local minima conformations in healthy and variant sequences of
a given protein (Clausen & Shehu, 2015; Clausen et al., 2015). These conformations are organized
into states via a simple lRMSD-based clustering scheme. A nearest-neighbor graph is then imposed
over the states, but an additional lRMSD constraint is imposed so as to connect only nearby states
via an edge. The assumption is made that transitions are possible between nearby states, and prob548

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

Figure 11: In this figure, reproduced from the work of Chiang et al. (2010), (a) shows the MSM connecting
twenty identified states of the villin headpiece peptide. The size of each node in the MSM is proportional to
the probability of the corresponding state in the stationary distribution. The width of each edge is proportional
to the transition probability between corresponding states. States with probability < 0.01 in the stationary
distribution, self-transitions, and edges with transition probability < 0.002 are not drawn to avoid cluttering.
The initial conformations are most likely to belong to state 12, and the native conformation is most likely
to belong to state 15. (b) Representative conformations are shown from states 7, 12, 13, 15, and 18. The
residues forming the important helix 1 in the villin headpiece peptide are drawn in red. (c) The most likely state
transition sequences from states 12 to 15 are shown here. This figure is reproduced under the Bioinformatics
Journals terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License.

abilities of such transitions can be estimated via a Boltzmann-like probability. The latter makes use
of the concept of the energy of a state. Several schemes are employed to determine the energy of a
state, ranging from the minimum to the average value over energies of conformations grouped in a
state.
549

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

Figure 12: This figure is reproduced from the work of Molloy et al. (2016). Panel (a) shows two wet-laboratory
structures representative of the ON and OFF structural states of the H-Ras catalytic domain. H-Ras switches
between these two states to regulate its biological activity in the cell. The loop regions where the change is
localized are shown in red and blue. The reactant (GTP) and product (GDP) are also drawn where they bind
H-Ras. Panel (b) shows two-dimensional projections of the probed energy surface of the H-Ras wildtype (WT)
and the oncogenic Q61L variant. Sampled conformations are projected on the top two principal components
(PC) obtained via Principal Component Analysis of sampled conformations. The color-coding follows the
Amber ff12SB internal energy values of the all-atom structure corresponding to each sampled conformation.
The ON  OFF minimum-cost paths obtained by querying the stochastic roadmap constructed over sampled
conformations are shown, as well. The costs of these paths are shown in the table in panel (c). The average
number of edges over all possible ON  OFF paths are obtained by treating the roadmap as an MSM. The
actual energy profiles of the minimum-cost paths obtained for the WT and Q61L variant are shown in panel
(d). This figure is reproduced with permission of Robotica 2016.

The result of this process is a stochastic roadmap that can be used to answer lowest-cost path
queries, as traditionally the case in roadmap-based methods, as well as yield average statistics, such
as the average number of edges in a transition, via the analogy of the stochastic roadmap with an
MSM. A path smoothing algorithm based on the conjugate peak refinement technique (Fischer &
Karplus, 1992) provides more detail with state-state paths and improves their energetic profile. The
average statistics, while not direct measurements of transition rates due to the lack of timescale information from non-MD methods, allow conducting comparisons between wildtype (WT) and variant (mutated) sequences of proteins of interest. In the work of Molloy et al. (2016), such statistics
are employed to obtain a structural explanation for the role of specific mutations on the biological
activity in two proteins implicated in human disorders. Figure 12 showcases some representative
results from application of the SRS-based approach in the work of Molloy et al. to the WT and
Q61L variant of the H-Ras protein. Ras sequence mutations have been implicated in various human
cancers (Karnoub & Weinberg, 2008).
550

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

Comparison of the energy landscapes, costs of the minimum-cost paths, energy profiles of these
paths, and the expected number in edges over all paths in each H-Ras sequence in Figure 12 provides a structural explanation for the impact of the Q61L mutation on the biological activity of this
enzyme. The mutation introduces an energy barrier between the ON and OFF states, and this barrier
increases both the cost of the minimum cost path and the number of expected edges in transition
paths. Taken together, these results suggest that the Q61L mutation, while preserving the stability
of the ON and OFF states, cannot form the transition state mimic, in agreement with wet-laboratory
studies (Gremer, Gilsbach, Ahmadian, & Wittinghofer, 2008; Gibbs, Schaber, Allard, Sigal, & Scolnick, 1988).
4.2.4 A DDRESSING L IMITED S AMPLING IN ROADMAP -BASED M ETHODS FOR M ODELING
P ROTEIN S TRUCTURAL T RANSITIONS
Sampling remains a key issue in adaptations of roadmap-based methods for biomolecular modeling.
While generally the focus of robotics-inspired methods has been on demonstrating their ability to
reproduce experimental knowledge qualitatively or even quantitatively on specific systems under
investigation, their general applicability has been largely sacrificed. For instance, the roadmapbased methods applied to model the discrete secondary structure formation events in protein folding
and unfolding are largely not applicable to model folding or other transition events in proteins
more than 150 amino acids where the states sought to the bridged by the transition may be farther
than 10A away from each-other. Strategies to reduce the number of variables so as to control
the dimensionality of the variable space have important ramifications. For instance, rigidity-based
techniques base their conclusions of where the most flexible regions are on analysis of a specific
structure. NMA techniques suffer from a similar issue, and regular application of NMA on sampled
conformations adds to the computational time demands of an algorithm. Other techniques that make
assumptions on which regions do or do not participate in a particular transition event rule out the
possibility of potentially complex, cooperative events. Others that bundle variables together and
obtain values for them from pre-compiled databases make similar assumptions on what types of
structural changes facilitate a transition.
Sampling will remain a challenge, but two complementary directions are being explored. The
first direction values broad applicability over specific improvements. Molloy and Shehu (2016)
propose that the community needs a benchmark testing dataset and a baseline approach against
which specific improvements and extensions can be evaluated. In particular, this work ignores
system-specific insights into which variable and which sampling schemes can be more effective
over others but instead compiles a broad set of variables and sampling/perturbation operators that
can be selected via a probabilistic scheme. Different schemes can be employed at different stages
of a roadmap-based method based on the distance of the conformations that need to be connected
and the size of the biomolecule under investigation. A general baseline implementation shows
comparable performance to system-specific methods and promises that further improvements can
guarantee a baseline performance over a broad set of biomolecules and problem instances. Related
ideas building on the concept of a move selector are presented by Gipson et al. (2013).
The second direction sacrifices broad applicability in the interest of improving the predictive
capability of roadmap-based methods to the point that reliable hypotheses can be formulated to further guide wet-laboratory experimentation. Maximova et al. (2015) recognize that roadmap-based
methods do not have to operate in a de novo setting but instead exploit the rich set of wet-laboratory
551

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

Figure 13: This figure is reproduced from the work of Maximova et al. (2015). The left panel shows a
schematic that summarizes all paths within a small energetic threshold of the minimum-cost path connecting
structure pairs of interest in calmodulin. Analysis of these paths reveals that known, wet-laboratory structures
mediate transitions of interest. The PDB ids of these mediating structures are shown along each of the paths.
The right panel shows successive structures in the minimum-cost paths found for transitions of calmodulin
from structure with PDB id 1CLL to that with PDB id 2F3Y and then from structure with PDB id 1CLL to that
with PDB id 1NWD. Numbers indicate model number within an NMR entry. This figure is reproduced with
permission of IEEE Society 2015.

structures to determine the variable space of interest. In particular, the SoPRIM algorithm proposed
by Maximova et al. subjects wet-laboratory structures of different sequences of a protein to a statistical multivariate analysis to determine variables that represent collective motions of atoms. Sampling
focuses on this space of variables and a multiscaling technique converts samples to all-atom structures that are local minima of the Amber ff14SB energy function. The samples are embedded in a
roadmap, and distance constraints ensure that edges are only placed between neighboring samples.
Edges are weighted based on the concept of minimum cost, recording only energetic increases.
In an additional contrast to existing roadmap-based treatments, the work of Maximova et al.
(2015) yields not only the minimum-cost path connecting a given start to a given goal structure, but
allows extracting additional paths with similar costs. The concept of tours is employed, based on
related work in robotics. The tours allow to investigate specific hypotheses regarding the participation of known meta-stable structures in a transition. A set of such structures can be specified, and
all minimum-cost tours that consider all subsets and orders of such structures are reported. Analysis
of tours with costs no higher than a specific threshold over the minimum-cost path reveals precious
information regarding important function-regulation transitions in several proteins, including Ras
and calmodulin. A summary result is shown in Figure 13.
Figure 13 extracts several energetically-credible paths representing the various, equiprobable
routes of transitions of calmodulin from its open, unbound state (represented by structure with PDB
id 1CLL) to two different, closed peptide and protein-bound states (represented by structures with
PDB id 2F3Y and 1NWD). The schematic summary of these paths in Figure 13 highlights that
these open-to-closed transitions in calmodulin may not make use of the calcium-bound structure
(PDB id 1CFD). Indeed, paths that go through this structure have higher energetic cost. A different
intermediate structure emerges from the analysis of paths. This structure (under PDB id 2K0E)
also binds calcium but is slightly different for that under PDB id 1CFD. The succession of structures shown in 13 makes clear that the domain collapse, re-arrangement, and partial unfolding of
the helix that links the N- and C-terminal domains in calmodulin are gradual, as captured in various structures in the NMR ensemble with PDB id 2K0E. This result is in good agreement with
552

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

the wet-laboratory study in the work of Gsponer, Christodoulou, Cavalli, Bui, Richter, Dobson,
and Vendruscolo (2008), which, in addition to contributing the NMR entry under PDB id 2K0E to
the Protein Data Bank, also concludes that correlated motions within the 2K0E Ca(2+)-CaM state
direct the structural fluctuations toward complex-like substates (Gsponer et al., 2008). While the
wet-laboratory study by Gsponer et al. (2008) was restricted to MLCK binding of CaM, the results
obtained by the SoPRIM algorithm (Maximova et al., 2015) suggest that the same mechanism observed by Gsponer et al. (2008) prepares CaM for binding to other peptides (the C-terminal Domain
of Petunia Glutamate Decarboxylase in 1NWD and the IQ domain in 2F3Y). The work of Maximova et al. (2015) points to a general mechanism for the apo-to-closed/complexed dynamics of
calmodulin, where correlated motions within the calcium-bound state direct the fluctuations and
population shift of this protein to its peptide-bound states.

5. Outstanding Challenges and Directions of Research
Robotics-inspired methods are becoming more powerful and diverse in their algorithmic strategies
and the problems they address in biomolecular modeling. While this survey has focused on treeand roadmap-based methods for modeling protein-ligand binding, protein de novo structure prediction, protein and RNA folding and unfolding, structural transitions in peptides and proteins, and
energy landscape mapping, other methods are building on related ideas to efficiently map ligand
migration channel networks in dynamic proteins (Lin & Song, 2011; Na & Song, 2015) or even
model antibody aggregation processes (Hoard, Jacobson, Manavi, & Tapia, 2016). While we have
attempted to provide a broad and deep survey of robotics-inspired methods for biomolecular modeling, an exhaustive survey is not possible. This particular sub-domain at the interface of Robotics and
computational structural biology is rapidly progressing, as demonstrated by the increasing number
of adaptations and applications showcased in this survey over earlier, related reviews of roboticsinspired methods (Al-Bluwi et al., 2012; Gipson, Hsu, Kavraki, & Latombe, 2012). As this survey
showcases, several algorithmic challenges remain. Below we provide a partial list of these challenges and prospects for future research.
5.1 Problem-Specific versus General Treatments
There is a pressing need in the community for benchmarks. While work has been largely driven by
specific biological systems and problems of interest, such data-driven research has often resulted
in specific design decisions that are not easily transferable to other systems and other problems.
For instance, key decisions on how to reduce dimensionality of the variable space and design compliant sampling strategies and perturbation operators on a specific problem instance may not be
applicable to another problem. A realization of the need for baseline, general treatments and benchmarks is leading researchers towards non-specific treatments to establish benchmarks and baseline
performance. Better sharing of problem instances, metrics, and algorithms with known baseline
performance will also be key to allow researchers to build on existing work and expedite progress.
5.2 Sampling
There is a growing realization that sampling will remain a central issue, despite clever reduced representations and sampling strategies. While the community of researchers adapting robot motion planning treatments for biomolecular modeling has been successful at integrating important knowledge
553

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

about biomolecules in model selection, sampling strategies, and energetic evaluations, this community has largely remained isolated from complementary work in AI on stochastic optimization of
continuous, non-linear variable spaces. In particular, there is a growing body of work in the evolutionary computation community on optimization of complex fitness landscapes. Some ideas from
this community have successfully been employed in de novo structure prediction (Shehu, 2013) and
mapping of protein energy landscapes (Clausen & Shehu, 2015; Clausen et al., 2015; Sapin, Carr,
De Jong, & Shehu, 2016). These ideas are also beginning to be incorporated in robotics-inspired
treatments of biomolecular dynamics (Molloy et al., 2016). Better awareness and integration of
effective practices of other communities dealing with similarly challenging high-dimensional problems is likely to address issues in sampling and lead to more powerful robotics-inspired treatments.
In this context, we see great opportunity for AI researchers to make contributions in sampling-based
treatments of biomolecular dynamics.
5.3 Decorrelations of Paths
In particular, applications of tree- and roadmap-based methods for modeling structural transitions
of biomolecules, path correlation is an issue. Path correlations can potentially skew any statistics
of interest and even yield to incorrect conclusions about a structural transition. The culprit in treebased methods is the bias that is applied to steer the conformation tree to the goal conformation.
Even multiple executions of a tree-based method are likely to result in similar paths. To some
extent, this source of path correlations can be addressed. For instance, Molloy and Shehu (2013)
makes use of an additional projection layer to steer the tree towards under-sampled regions of the
conformation space. This is shown to improve path diversity. Yet another culprit that is shared by
tree- and roadmap-based methods is density of sampling. For instance, undersampling of specific
regions may lead to the conclusion that the region is not energetically favorable for the biomolecule
at hand. Further investigation is needed to quantify and reduce path correlations in robotics-inspired
methods. This direction is also ripe for cross-fertilization of ideas from different sub-communities
in AI.
5.4 Injection of Dynamics
A common criticism of robotics-inspired methods is that they are essentially geometric treatments
of biomolecules. While to some extent geometric treatments are accepted in modeling biomolecular structure, they are seen as inadequate in modeling biomolecular dynamics. Modeling dynamics
is largely seen as exclusive to MD simulation frameworks. In a somewhat colloquial and simplistic characterization of robotics-inspired methods, biomolecular dynamics has nothing to do with
robot motion planning. This characterization can be overcome by pointing out that the superficial
analogies are only used to inspire robotics researchers, but the deeper analogies that are exploited
and shown to have an impact are those on selection of models, variables, fast forward and inverse
kinematics, and effective sampling strategies. It is worth noting that the latter are not exclusively
the domain of robotics-inspired researchers. On the contrary, issues of effective variable selection
or representation, variation operators, employment of such operators in sampling strategies, and
others are of broad interest to AI researchers working on optimization problems as part of modeling
abstract, mechanical, or biological systems.
At various places, this survey has highlighted that robotics-inspired methods are capable not
only of reproducing wet-laboratory knowledge and data but also of providing novel findings to direct
554

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

further experimentation in wet laboratories. Still, a valid criticism of robotics-inspired methods
is that edges in trees or roadmaps do not provide a detailed view of the diffusion between the
two conformations they connect. While the survey points out in Section 4 several challenges with
integrating MD trajectories in robotics-inspired framework, it is important that the community think
of ways to do so effectively. Injection of ideas from the AI community at large may prove beneficial
here. A growing body of work in computational biophysics is pointing to effective frameworks of
biomolecular dynamics that integrate thousands or more short MD trajectories in MSMs to capture
biomolecular dynamics. Cross-fertiziliation of ideas from the AI and biophysics communities is
likely to prove fruitful in explicitly integrating MD in robotics-inspired methods.
5.5 Beyond Path Computations: Roadmaps and MSMs
As this survey highlights in Section 4, MSMs have become very popular in computational biophysics literature to organize and extract statistics from many, independent MD simulations of
biomolecular folding or other structural transitions (Jayachandran, Vishal, & Pande, 2006; Chodera
et al., 2007; Noe & Fischer, 2008; Prinz, Keller, & Noe, 2011a; Noe, Doose, Daidone, Lollmann,
Sauer, Chodera, & Smith, 2011; Perez-Hernandez, Paul, Giorgino, De Fabritiis, & Noe, 2013; Weber, Jack, & Pande, 2013; Deng, Dai, & Levy, 2013; Chodera & Noe, 2014; Malmstrom, Lee,
Van Wart, & Amaro, 2014; Song & Zhuang, 2014; Shukla, Hernandez, Weber, & Pande, 2015).
Several survey articles are dedicated to reviewing MSM-based treatments of biomolecular dynamics (Pande, Beachamp, & Bowman, 2010; Gipson et al., 2012; Maximova et al., 2016) review MSMbased treatments of biomolecular dynamics. Works by Chiang et al. (2006), Chiang et al. (2007),
Chiang et al. (2010), and Molloy et al. (2016) provide an important first step in the integration of
MSMs in the analysis of conformation spaces probed via robotics-inspired algorithms. While Chiang et al. (2010) and Molloy et al. (2016) address some of the issues on to convert roadmaps into
MSMs, many others remain, including definition of structural states, possible undersampling of specific states, feedback mechanisms to address undersampling, and rigorous calculation of transition
probabilities. Some of these issues are also contended with in the computational biophysics community, and initial treatments have emerged (Singhal et al., 2004; Singhal & Pande, 2005; Prinz, Wu,
Sarich, Keller, Senne, Held, Chodera, Schutte, & Noe, 2011b; Malmstrom et al., 2014; Da, Sheong,
Silva, & Huang, 2014). We see a great opportunity here for AI researchers, particularly those with
expertise in machine learning, to coordinate efforts with computational biophysicists. Such efforts
will undoubtedly lead to richer and more powerful computational treatments of biomolecular dynamics.
5.6 Cross-Fertilization of Ideas
As this survey shows, work in modeling biomolecular structure and dynamics is highly interdisciplinary, and great progress is achieved when ideas from different communities are combined and
integrated in computational treatments. There is a rich set of scientific questions that can be formulated to understand the role of biomolecular structure and dynamics in human biology and health.
These questions often result in exceptionally challenging computational problems that necessitate
sophisticated algorithmic treatments. Treatments that add to the current knowledge of biomolecular
systems in chemistry, physics, and biophysics are likely to advance not only our modeling capabilities but also make important, general contributions to AI research.
555

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

Acknowledgements
Funding for this work is provided in part by the National Science Foundation. The work A. Shehu is
supported by NSF-CCF1421001, NSF-ACI1440581, and NSF-IIS1144106. The work of E. Plaku
is supported by NSF-ACI1440581, NSF-IIS1449505, and NSF-IIS1548406.

References
Abayagan, R., Totrov, M., & Kuznetsov, D. (1994). ICM - a new method for protein modeling and
design: applications to docking and structure prediction from the distorted native conformation. J Comput Chem, 15(5), 488506.
Aden, J., & Wolf-Watz, M. (2007). NMR identification of transient complexes critical to adenylate
kinase catalysis. J Amer Chem Soc, 129(45), 14003 14012.
Al-Bluwi, I., Simeon, T., & Cortes, J. (2012). Motion planning algorithms for molecular simulations: A survey. Comput Sci Rev, 6(4), 125143.
Al-Bluwi, I., Vaisset, M., Simeon, T., & Cortes, J. (2013). Modeling protein conformational transitions by a combination of coarse-grained normal mode analysis and robotics-inspired methods. BMC Struct Biol, 13(S2), Suppl 1.
Amato, N. M., Bayazit, B., Dale, L., Jones, C., & Vallejo, D. (1998). OBPRM: An obstacle-based
PRM for 3D workspaces. In Workshop Algorithm Found Robot, Vol. 86 of Springer Tracts in
Advanced Robotics, pp. 156168. Springer.
Amato, N. M., Dill, K. A., & Song, G. (2003). Using motion planning to map protein folding
landscapes and analyze folding kinetics of known native structures. J Comput Biol, 10(3-4),
239255.
Anfinsen, C. B. (1973). Principles that govern the folding of protein chains. Science, 181(4096),
223230.
Apaydin, M. S., Brutlag, D. L., Guestrin, C., Hsu, D., & Latombe, J.-C. (2003). Stochastic roadmap
simulation: an efficient representation and algorithm for analyzing molecular motion. J Comput Biol, 10(3-4), 257281.
Apaydin, M. S., Brutlag, D. L., Hsu, D., & Latombe, J.-C. (2002). Stochastic conformational
roadmaps for computing ensemble properties of molecular motion. In Workshop Algorithm
Found Robot, pp. 131147, Nice, France. IEEE.
Apaydin, M. S., Singh, A. P., Brutlag, D. L., & Latombe, J.-C. (2001). Capturing molecular energy
landscapes with probabilistic conformational roadmaps. In Intl Conf Robot Autom (ICRA),
Vol. 1, pp. 932939, Seoul, Korea. IEEE.
Atilgan, A., Durell, S., Jernigan, R., Demirel, M., Keskin, O., & Bahar, I. (2001). Anisotropy of
fluctuation dynamics of proteins with an elastic network model. Biophys J, 80(1), 505515.
Bahar, R., & Rader, A. J. (2005). Coarse-grained normal mode analysis in structural biology. Curr
Opinion Struct Biol, 204(5), 17.
Baldwin, R. L. (1995). The nature of protein folding pathways: the classical versus the new view. J
Biomol NMR, 5(2), 103109.
556

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

Barbe, S., Cortes, J., Simeon, T., Monsan, P., Remaud-Simeon, M., & Andre, I. (2011). A mixed
molecular modeling-robotics approach to investigate lipase large molecular motions. Proteins: Struct Funct Bioinf, 79(8), 25172529.
Baron, R. (2013). Fast sampling of A-to-B protein global conformational transitions: From Galileo
Galilei to Monte Carlo anisotropic network modeling. Biophys J, 105(7), 15451546.
Batcho, P., Case, D. A., & Schlick, T. (2001). Optimized particle-mesh ewald/multiple-time step
integration for molecular dynamics simulations. J Chem Phys, 115(9), 40034018.
Bekris, K. E., & Kavraki, L. E. (2007). Greedy but safe replanning under kinodynamic constraints.
In Intl Conf Robot Autom (ICRA), pp. 704710, Rome, Italy. IEEE.
Berman, H. M., Henrick, K., & Nakamura, H. (2003). Announcing the worldwide Protein Data
Bank. Nat Struct Biol, 10(12), 980980.
Boehr, D. D., & Wright, P. E. (2008). How do proteins interact?. Science, 320(5882), 14291430.
Bradley, P., Misura, K. M., & Baker, D. (2005). Toward high-resolution de novo structure prediction
for small proteins. Science, 309(5742), 18681871.
Brooks, B. R., Bruccoleri, R. E., Olafson, B. D., States, D. J., Swaminathan, S., & Karplus, M.
(1983). CHARMM: a program for macromolecular energy, minimization, and dynamics calculations. J Comput Chem, 4(2), 187217.
Bryngelson, J. D., Onuchic, J. N., Socci, N. D., & Wolynes, P. G. (1995). Funnels, pathways, and
the energy landscape of protein folding: a synthesis. Proteins: Struct Funct Genet, 21(3),
167195.
Bryngelson, J. D., & Wolynes, P. G. (1987). Spin glasses and the statistical mechanics of protein
folding. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 84(21), 75247528.
Burgess, A. W., & Scheraga, H. A. (1975). Assessment of some problems associated with prediction
of the three-dimensional structure of a protein from its amino-acid sequence. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA, 72(4), 12211225.
Burns, B., & Brock, O. (2007). Single-query motion planning with utility-guided random trees. In
Intl Conf Robot Autom (ICRA), pp. 33073312, Rome, Italy. IEEE.
Case, D. A., Darden, T. A., Cheatham, T. E. I., Simmerling, C. L., Wang, J., Duke, R. E., Luo, R.,
Merz, K. M., Pearlman, D. A., Crowley, M., Walker, R. C., Zhang, W., Wang, B., Hayik, S.,
Roitberg, A., Seabra, G., Wong, K. F., Paesani, F., Wu, X., Brozell, S., Tsui, V., Gohlke, H.,
Yang, L., Tan, C., Mongan, J., et al. (2014). Amber 14. http://ambermd.org/.
Chiang, T. H., Apaydin, M., Brutlag, D., Hsu, D., & Latombe, J. (2006). Predicting experimental
quantities in protein folding kinetics using stochastic roadmap simulation. In Res Comput
Mol Biol, Vol. 3909 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 410424. Springers.
Chiang, T. H., Apaydin, M. S., Brutlag, D. L., Hsu, D., & Latombe, J.-C. (2007). Using stochastic
roadmap simulation to predict experimental quantities in protein folding kinetics: folding
rates and phi-values. J Comput Biol, 14(5), 578593.
Chiang, T. H., Hsu, D., & C., L. J. (2010). Markov dynamic models for long-timescale protein
motion. Bioinformatics, 26(12), 269277.
557

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

Chirikjian, G. S. (1993). General methods for computing hyper-redundant manipulator inverse
kinematics. In Intl Conf Intell Robot Sys (IROS), Vol. 2, pp. 10671073, Yokohama, Japan.
IEEE.
Chodera, J. D., & Noe, F. (2014). Markov state models of biomolecular conformational dynamics.
Curr Opinion Struct Biol, 25, 135144.
Chodera, J. D., Singhal, N., Pande, V. S., Dill, K. A., & Swope, W. C. (2007). Automatic discovery
of metastable states for the construction of markov models of macromolecular conformational
dynamics. J Chem Phys, 126(15), 155101.
Choset, H., & et al. (2005). Principles of Robot Motion: Theory, Algorithms, and Implementations
(1st edition). MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Ciu, Q., & Bahar, I. (2005). Normal Mode Analysis: Theory and Applications to Biological and
Chemical Systems (1st edition). CRC Press.
Clausen, R., Ma, B., Nussinov, R., & Shehu, A. (2015). Mapping the conformation space of wildtype
and mutant H-Ras with a memetic, cellular, and multiscale evolutionary algorithm. PLoS
Comput Biol, 11(9), e1004470.
Clausen, R., & Shehu, A. (2015). A data-driven evolutionary algorithm for mapping multi-basin
protein energy landscapes. J Comp Biol, 22(9), 844860.
Clementi, C. (2008). Coarse-grained models of protein folding: Toy-models or predictive tools?.
Curr Opinion Struct Biol, 18(1), 1015.
Coifman, R. R., Lafon, S., Lee, A. B., Maggioni, M., Nadler, B., Warner, F., & Zucker, S. W. (2005).
Geometric diffusions as a tool for harmonic analysis and structure definition of data: Diffusion
maps. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 102(21), 74267431.
Cooper, A. (1984). Protein fluctuations and the thermodynamic uncertainty principle. Prog Biophys
Mol Biol, 44(3), 181214.
Cortes, J., Jaillet, L., & Simeon, T. (2007). Molecular disassembly with RRT-like algorithms. In
Intl Conf Robot Autom (ICRA), pp. 33013306, Roma, Italy.
Cortes, J., Le, D. T., Lehl, R., & Simeon, T. (2010). Simulating ligand-induced conformational
changes in proteins using a mechanical disassembly method. Phys Chem Chem Phys, 12(29),
82688276.
Cortes, J., Simeon, T.AND Remauld-Simeon, M., & Tran, V. (2004). Geometric algorithms for the
conformational analysis of long protein loops. J Comput Chem, 25(7), 956967.
Cortes, J., Simeon, T.AND de Angulo, R., Guieysse, D., Remaud-Simeon, M., & Tran, V. (2005). A
path planning approach for computing large-amplitude motions of flexible molecules. Bioinformatics, 21(S1), 116125.
Craig, J. (1989). Introduction to robotics: mechanics and control (2nd edition). Addison-Wesley,
Boston, MA.
Da, L. T., Sheong, F. K., Silva, D. A., & Huang, X. (2014). Application of Markov state models
to simulate long timescale dynamics of biological macromolecules. Adv Exp Med Biol, 805,
2966.
558

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

Dalibard, S., & Laumond, J.-P. (2009). Control of probabilistic diffusion in motion planning. In
Workshop Algorithm Found Robot, Vol. 57 of Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics, pp. 467
481. Springer.
Das, A., Gur, M., Cheng, M. H., Jo, S., Bahar, I., & Roux, B. (2014). Exploring the conformational transitions of biomolecular systems using a simple two-state anisotropic network
model. PLoS Comput Biol, 10(4), e1003521.
Das, P., Matysiak, S., & Clementi, C. (2005). Balancing energy and entropy: A minimalist model
for the characterization of protein folding landscapes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 102(29),
1014110146.
Das, P., Moll, M., Stamati, H., Kavraki, L. E., & Clementi, C. (2006). Low-dimensional free energy
landscapes of protein folding reactions by nonlinear dimensionality reduction. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA, 103(26), 98859890.
Delarue, M., & Sanejouand, Y. H. (2002). Simplified normal mode analysis of conformational
transitions in DNA-dependent polymerases: the elastic network model. J Mol Biol, 320(5),
10111024.
Deng, N.-J., Dai, W., & Levy, R. M. (2013). How kinetics within the unfolded state affects protein
folding: An analysis based on markov state models and an ultra-long md trajectory. J Phys
Chem B, 117(42), 1278712799.
Denny, J., & Amato, N. M. (2013). Toggle PRM: A coordinated mapping of C-free and C-obstacle
in arbitrary dimension. In Workshop Algorithm Found Robot, Vol. 86 of Springer Tracts in
Advanced Robotics, pp. 297312. Springer.
Devaurs, D., Molloy, K., Vaisset, M., Shehu, A., Cortes, J., & Simeon, T. (2015). Characterizing
energy landscapes of peptides using a combination of stochastic algorithms. IEEE Trans
NanoBioScience, 14(5), 545552.
Diekmann, S., & Hoischen, C. (2014). Biomolecular dynamics and binding studies in the living
cell. Physics of Life Reviews, 11(1), 130.
Dill, K. A., & Chan, H. S. (1997). From Levinthal to pathways to funnels. Nat Struct Biol, 4(1),
1019.
Dryga, A., Chakrabarty, S., Vicatos, S., & Warshel, A. (2011). Realistic simulation of the activation
of voltage-gated ion channels. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 109(9), 33353340.
Dubrow, A. (2015). What got done in one year at NSFs Stampede supercomputer. Comput Sci Eng,
17(2), 8388.
Ekenna, C., Thomas, S., & Amato, N. (2016). Adaptive local learning in sampling based motion
planning for protein folding. BMC Syst Biol, 10(Suppl 2).
Engh, R. A., & Huber, R. (1991). Accurate bond and angle parameters for X-ray protein structure
refinement. Acta Crystallogr, A47, 392400.
Enosh, A., Raveh, B., Furman-Schueler, O., Halperin, D., & Ben-Tal, N. (2008). Generation, comparison, and merging of pathways between protein conformations: gating in K-channels. Biophys J, 95(8), 38503860.
559

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

Fattebert, J.-L., Richards, D. F., & Glosli, J. N. (2012). Dynamic load balancing algorithm for
molecular dynamics based on voronoi cells domain decompositions. Comput Phys Communic, 183(12), 26082615.
Fenwick, R. B., van den Bedem, H., Fraser, J. S., & Wright, P. E. (2014). Integrated description of
protein dynamics from room-temperature X-ray crystallography and NMR. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA, 111(4), E445E454.
Fernandez-Medarde, A., & Santos, E. (2011). Ras in cancer and developmental diseases. Genes
Cancer, 2(3), 344358.
Fersht, A. (2013). Profile of martin karplus, michael levitt, and arieh warshel, 2013 nobel laureates
in chemistry. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 110(49), 1965619657.
Fersht, A. R. (1999). Structure and Mechanism in Protein Science. A Guide to Enzyme Catalysis
and Protein Folding (3 edition). W. H. Freeman and Co., New York, NY.
Feynman, R. P., Leighton, R. B., & Sands, M. (1963). The Feynman Lectures on Physics. AddisonWesley, Reading, MA.
Fischer, S., & Karplus, M. (1992). Conjugate peak refinement: an algorithm for finding reaction
paths and accurate transition states in systems with many degrees of freedom. Chem Phys
Lett, 194(3), 252261.
Fox, N., & Streinu, I. (2013). Towards accurate modeling of noncovalent interactions for protein
rigidity analysis. BMC Bioinf, 14(Suppl 18), S3.
Gall, A., Ilioaia, C., Kruger, T. P., Novoderezhkin, V. I., Robert, B., & van Grondelle, R. (2015).
Conformational switching in a light-harvesting protein as followed by single-molecule spectroscopy. Biophys J, 108(11), 27132720.
Gibbs, J. B., Schaber, M. D., Allard, W. J., Sigal, I. S., & Scolnick, E. M. (1988). Purification of Ras
GTPase activating protein from bovine brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 85(14), 50265030.
Gipson, B., Hsu, D., Kavraki, L. E., & Latombe, J.-C. (2012). Computational models of protein
kinematics and dynamics: Beyond simulation. Annu Rev Anal Chem, 5, 273291.
Gipson, B., Moll, M., & Kavraki, L. E. (2013). SIMS: A hybrid method for rapid conformational
analysis. PLoS One, 8(7), e68826.
Gorfe, A. A., Grant, B. J., & McCammon, J. A. (2008). Mapping the nucleotide and isoformdependent structural and dynamical features of Ras proteins. Structure, 16(6), 885896.
Gotz, A. W., Williamson, M. J., Xu, D., Poole, D., Le Grand, S., & Walker, R. C. (2012). Routine
microsecond molecular dynamics simulations with amber on GPUs. 1. Generalized Born. J
Chem Theory Comput, 8(5), 15421555.
Grant, B. J., Gorfe, A. A., & McCammon, J. A. (2009). Ras conformational switching: Simulating
nucleotide-dependent conformational transitions with accelerated molecular dynamics. PLoS
Comput Biol, 5(3), e1000325.
Greenleaf, W. J., Woodside, M. T., & Block, S. M. (2007). High-resolution, single-molecule measurements of biomolecular motion. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct, 36, 171190.
Gremer, L., Gilsbach, B., Ahmadian, M. R., & Wittinghofer, A. (2008). Fluoride complexes of
oncogenic Ras mutants to study the Ras-RasGap interaction. Biol Chem, 389(9), 11631171.
560

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

Gsponer, J., Christodoulou, J., Cavalli, A., Bui, J. M., Richter, B., Dobson, C. M., & Vendruscolo, M.
(2008). A coupled equilibrium shift mechanism in calmodulin-mediated signal transduction.
Structure, 16(5), 736746.
Han, K. F., & Baker, D. (1996). Global properties of the mapping between local amino acid sequence
and local structure in proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 93(12), 58145818.
Han, L., & Amato, N. M. (2001). A kinematics-based probabilistic roadmap method for closed chain
systems. In Donald, B. R., Lynch, K. M., & Rus, D. (Eds.), Algorithmic and Computational
Robotics: New Directions, pp. 233246. AK Peters, MA.
Harvey, M. J., Giupponi, G., & de Fabritiis, G. (2009). ACEMD: Accelerating biomolecular dynamics in the microsecond timescale. J Comput Theor Chem, 5(6), 16321639.
Haspel, N., Moll, M., Baker, M. L., Chiu, W., & E., K. L. (2010). Tracing conformational changes
in proteins. BMC Struct Biol, 10(Suppl1), S1.
Haspel, N., Tsai, C., Wolfson, H., & Nussinov, R. (2003). Reducing the computational complexity
of protein folding via fragment folding and assembly. Protein Sci, 12(6), 11771187.
Hastings, W. K. (1970). Monte Carlo sampling methods using Markov chains and their applications.
Biometrika, 57(1), 97109.
Hermans, J., Berendsen, H. J. C., van Gunsteren, W. F., & Postma, J. P. M. (1984). A consistent
empirical potential for water-protein interactions. Biopolymers, 23(8), 15131518.
Hoang, T. H., Trovato, A., Seno, F., Banavar, J. R., & Maritan, A. (2007). Geometry and symmetry
presculpt the free-energy landscape of proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 101(21), 7960
7964.
Hoard, B., Jacobson, B., Manavi, K., & Tapia, L. (2016). Extending rule-based methods to model
molecular geometry and 3d model resolution. BMC Syst Biol, 10(Suppl 2), 48.
Hoelder, S., Clarke, P. A., & Workman, P. (2012). Discovery of small molecule cancer drugs:
Successes, challenges and opportunities. Mol Oncol, 6(2), 522524.
Hohlbein, J., Craggs, T. D., & Cordes, T. (2014). Alternating-laser excitation: single-molecule
FRET and beyond. Chem Soc Rev, 43(4), 11561171.
Hori, N., Chikenji, G., & Takada, S. (2009). Folding energy landscape and network dynamics of
small globular proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 106(1), 7378.
Hornak, V., Abel, R., Okur, A., Strockbine, B., Roitberg, A., & Simmerling, C. (2006). Comparison
of multiple amber force fields and development of improved protein backbone parameters.
Proteins: Struct Funct Bioinf, 65(3), 712725.
Hsu, D., Kindel, R., Latombe, J.-C., & Rock, S. (2002). Randomized kinodynamic motion planning
with moving obstacles. Intl J Robot Res, 21(3), 233255.
Hsu, D., Sanchez-Ante, G., & Sun, Z. (2005). Hybrid PRM sampling with a cost-sensitive adaptive
strategy. In Intl Conf Robot Autom (ICRA), pp. 38853891, Barcelona, Spain.
Humphrey, W., Dalke, A., & Schulten, K. (1996). VMD - Visual Molecular Dynamics. J Mol Graph
Model, 14(1), 3338. http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd/.
Jaillet, L., Corcho, F. J., Perez, J.-J., & Cortes, J. (2011). Randomized tree construction algorithm
to explore energy landscapes. J Comput Chem, 32(16), 34643474.
561

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

Jaillet, L., Cortes, J., & Simeon, T. (2008). Transition-based RRT for path planning in continuous
cost spaces. In Intl Conf Intell Robot Sys (IROS), pp. 2226, Stanford, CA. IEEE/RSJ.
Jaillet, L., Yershova, A., LaValle, S. M., & Simeon, T. (2005). Adaptive tuning of the sampling
domain for dynamic-domain RRTs. In Intl Conf Intell Robot Sys (IROS), pp. 40864091.
IEEE/RSJ.
Jayachandran, G., Vishal, V., & Pande, V. S. (2006). Using massively parallel simulation and Markovian models to study protein folding: examining the dynamics of the villin headpiece. J Chem
Phys, 124(16), 164902164914.
Jenzler-Wildman, K., & Kern, D. (2007). Dynamic personalities of proteins. Nature, 450(7172),
964972.
Jorgensen, W. L., Maxwell, D. S., & Tirado-Reves, J. (1988). Development and testing of the OPLS
all-atom force field on conformational energetics and properties of organic liquids. J Amer
Chem Soc, 118(45), 1122511236.
Kalisiak, M., & van de Panne, M. (2006). RRT-blossom: RRT with a local flood-fill behavior. In
Intl Conf Robot Autom (ICRA), pp. 12371242, Orlando, FL. IEEE.
Kamerlin, S. C., Haranczyk, M., & Warshel, A. (2009). Progresses in ab initio QM/MM free energy
simulations of electrostatic energies in proteins: Accelerated QM/MM studies of pka, redox
reactions and solvation free energies. J Phys Chem B, 113(5), 12531272.
Karam, P., Powdrill, M. H., Liu, H. W., Vasquez, C., Mah, W., Bernatchez, J., Gotte, M., & Cosa,
G. (2014). Dynamics of hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA-dependent RNA polymerase NS5B in
complex with RNA. J Biol Chem, 289(20), 1439914411.
Karaman, S., & Frazzoli, E. (2011). Sampling-based algorithms for optimal motion planning. Intl
J Robot Res, 30(7), 846894.
Karnoub, A. E., & Weinberg, R. A. (2008). Ras oncogenes: split personalities. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol, 9(7), 517531.
Kavraki, L. E., Svestka, P., Latombe, J. C., & Overmars, M. H. (1996). Probabilistic roadmaps for
path planning in high-dimensional configuration spaces. IEEE Trans Robot Automat, 12(4),
566580.
Kay, L. E. (1998). Protein dynamics from NMR. Nat Struct Biol, 5(2-3), 513517.
Kay, L. E. (2005). NMR studies of protein structure and dynamics. J Magn Reson, 173(2), 193207.
Kendrew, J. C., Bodo, G., Dintzis, H. M., Parrish, R. G., Wyckoff, H., & Phillips, D. C. (1958).
A three-dimensional model of the myoglobin molecule obtained by X-ray analysis. Nature,
181(4610), 662666.
Kendrew, J. C., Dickerson, R. E., Strandberg, B. E., Hart, R. G., Davies, D. R., Phillips, D. C., &
Shore, V. C. (1960). Structure of myoglobin: A three-dimensional Fourier synthesis at 2A
resolution. Nature, 185(4711), 422427.
Khaliullin, R. Z., VandeVondele, J., & Hutter, J. (2013). Efficient linear-scaling density functional
theory for molecular systems. J Chem Theory Comput, 9(10), 44214427.
Kiesel, S., Burns, E., & Ruml, W. (2012). Abstraction-guided sampling for motion planning. In
Symp Combinat Search (SOCS), pp. 162163, Niagara Falls, Canada.
562

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

Kim, K. M., Jernigan, R. L., & Chirikjian, G. S. (2002a). Efficient generation of feasible pathways
for protein conformational transitions. Biophys J, 83(3), 16201630.
Kim, M. K., Chirikjian, G. S., & Jernigan, R. L. (2002b). Elastic models of conformational transitions in macromolecules. J Mol Graph Model, 21(2), 151160.
Kirillova, S., Cortes, J., Stefaniu, A., & Simeon, T. (2008). An NMA-guided path planning approach
for computing large-amplitude conformational changes in proteins. Proteins: Struct Funct
Bioinf, 70(1), 131143.
Kolodny, R., Guibas, L., Levitt, M., & Koehl, P. (2005). Inverse kinematics in biology: the protein
loop closure problem. Intl J Robot Res, 24(2-3), 151163.
Ladd, A. M., & Kavraki, L. E. (2004). Fast tree-based exploration of state space for robots with dynamics. In Workshop Algorithm Found Robot, pp. 297312. Springer, Utrecht/Zeist, Netherlands.
Ladd, A. M., & Kavraki, L. E. (2005). Motion planning in the presence of drift, underactuation and
discrete system changes. In Robot: Sci and Sys, pp. 233241, Boston, MA.
LaValle, S. M., & Kuffner, J. J. (2001). Randomized kinodynamic planning. Intl J Robot Res, 20(5),
378400.
Leaver-Fay, A., Tyka, M., Lewis, S. M., Lange, O. F., Thompson, J., Jacak, R., Kaufman, K., Renfrew, P. D., Smith, C. A., Sheffler, W., Davis, I. W., Cooper, S., Treuille, A., Mandell, D. J.,
Richter, F., Ban, Y. E., Fleishman, S. J., Corn, J. E., Kim, D. E., Lyskov, S., Berrondo, M.,
Mentzer, S., Popovi, Z., & et. al. (2011). ROSETTA3: an object-oriented software suite for
the simulation and design of macromolecules. Methods Enzymol, 487, 545574.
Lee, A., Streinu, I., & Brock, O. (2005). A methodology for efficiently sampling the conformation
space of molecular structures. J Phys Biol, 2(4), 108S115.
Lee, H. M., M., K. S., Kim, H. M., & Suh, Y. D. (2013). Single-molecule surface-enhanced Raman
spectroscopy: a perspective on the current status. Phys Chem Chem Phys, 15, 52765287.
Lee, J., Kwon, O., Zhang, L., & Yoon, S.-E. (2014). A selective retraction-based RRT planner for
various environments. IEEE Trans Robotics, 30(4), 10021011.
Levitt, M., & Lifson, S. (1969). Refinement of protein conformations using a macromolecular
energy minimization procedure. J Mol Biol, 46(2), 269279.
Levitt, M., & Warshel, A. (1975). Computer simulation of protein folding. Nature, 253(5494),
9496.
Levy, Y., Jortner, J., & Becker, O. M. (2001). Solvent effects on the energy landscapes and folding
kinetics of polyalanine. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 98(5), 21882193.
Li, D., Yang, H., Han, L., & Huo, S. (2008). Predicting the folding pathway of engrailed homeodomain with a probabilistic roadmap enhanced reaction-path algorithm. Biophys J, 94(5),
16221629.
Lifson, S., & Warshel, A. (1968). A consistent force field for calculation on conformations, vibrational spectra and enthalpies of cycloalkanes and n-alkane molecules. J Phys Chem, 49,
51165129.
563

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

Lin, T., & Song, G. (2011). Efficient mapping of ligand migration channel networks in dynamic
proteins. Proteins: Struct Funct Bioinf, 79(8), 24752490.
Lindorff-Larsen, K., Piana, S., Dror, R. O., & Shaw, D. E. (2011). How fast-folding proteins fold.
Science, 334(6055), 517520.
Lois, G., Blawzdziewicz, J., & OHern, C. S. (2010). Protein folding on rugged energy landscapes:
Conformational diffusion on fractal networks. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys, 81(5
Pt 1), 051907.
Lotan, I., van den Bedem, H., Deacon, A. M., & Latombe, J.-C. (2004). Computing protein structures from electron density maps: The mising loop problem. In Erdman, M., Hsu, D., Overmars, M., & van der Stappen, F. (Eds.), Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics VI, pp. 153168.
Springer STAR Series.
Ma, B., Kumar, S., Tsai, C., & Nussinov, R. (1999). Folding funnels and binding mechanisms.
Protein Eng, 12(9), 713720.
Ma, J., & Karplus, M. (1997). Molecular switch in signal transduction: reaction paths of the conformational changes in ras p21. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 94(22), 1190511910.
Maisuradze, G. G., Liwo, A., & Scheraga, H. A. (2009). Principal component analysis for protein
folding dynamics. J Mol Biol, 385(1), 312329.
Malmstrom, R. D., Lee, C. T., Van Wart, A. T., & Amaro, R. E. (2014). Application of moleculardynamics based Markov state models to functional proteins. J Chem Theory Comput, 10(7),
26482657.
Manocha, D., & Canny, J. (1994). Efficient inverse kinematics for general 6r manipulator. IEEE
Trans Robot Autom, 10(5), 648657.
Manocha, D., & Zhu, Y. (1994). Kinematic manipulation of molecular chains subject to rigid constraints. In Altman, R. B., Brutlag, D. L., Karp, P. D., Lathrop, R. H., & Searls, D. B. (Eds.),
Intl Conf Intell Sys Mol Biol (ISMB), Vol. 2, pp. 285293, Stanford, CA. AAAI.
Manocha, D., Zhu, Y., & Wright, W. (1995). Conformational analysis of molecular chains using
nano-kinematics. Comput. Appl. Biosci., 11(1), 7186.
Maragakis, P., & Karplus, M. (2005). Large amplitude conformational change in proteins explored
with a plastic network model: adenylate kinase. J Mol Biol, 352(4), 807822.
Matysiak, S., & Clementi, C. (2004). Optimal combination of theory and experiment for the characterization of the protein folding landscape of S6: How far can a minimalist model go?. J
Mol Biol, 343(8), 235248.
Matysiak, S., & Clementi, C. (2006). Minimalist protein model as a diagnostic tool for misfolding
and aggregation. J Mol Biol, 363(1), 297308.
Maximova, T., Moffatt, R., Ma, B., Nussinov, R., & Shehu, A. (2016). Principles and overview of
sampling methods for modeling macromolecular structure and dynamics. PLoS Comput Biol,
12(4), e1004619.
Maximova, T., Plaku, E., & Shehu, A. (2015). Computing transition paths in multiple-basin proteins
with a probabilistic roadmap algorithm guided by structure data. In Intl Conf on Bioinf and
Biomed (BIBM), pp. 3542, Washington, D.C. IEEE.
564

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

McCammon, J. A., Gelin, B. R., & Karplus, M. (1977). Dynamics of folded proteins. Nature,
267(5612), 585590.
McLachlan, A. D. (1972). A mathematical procedure for superimposing atomic coordinates of
proteins. Acta Crystallogr A, 26(6), 656657.
McMahon, T., Thomas, S., & Amato, N. M. (2015). Reachable volume RRT. In Intl Conf Robot
Autom (ICRA), pp. 29772984, Seattle, WA. IEEE.
Metropolis, N., Rosenbluth, A. W., Rosenbluth, M. N., Teller, A. H., & Teller, E. (1953). Equation
of state calculations by fast computing machines. J Chem Phys, 21(6), 10871092.
Miao, Y., Sinko, W., Pierce, L., Bucher, D., Walker, R. C., & McCammon, J. A. (2014). Improved
reweighting of accelerated molecular dynamics simulations for free energy calculation. J
Chem Theory Comput, 10(7), 26772689.
Michalet, X., Weiss, S., & Jager, M. (2006). Single-molecule fluorescence studies of protein folding
and conformational dynamics. Chem Rev, 106(5), 17851813.
Moerner, W. E., & Fromm, D. P. (2003). Methods of single-molecule fluorescence spectroscopy.
Rev Scientific Instruments, 74(8), 35973619.
Moffat, K. (2003). The frontiers of time-resolved macromolecular crystallography: movies and
chirped X-ray pulses. Faraday Discuss, 122(79-88), 6577.
Moll, M., Schwartz, D., & Kavraki, L. E. (2008). Roadmap methods for protein folding. In Zaki,
M., & Bystroff, C. (Eds.), Protein Structure Prediction, Vol. 413 of Methods Mol Biol, pp.
219239. Springer.
Molloy, K., Clausen, R., & Shehu, A. (2016). A stochastic roadmap method to model protein
structural transitions. Robotica, 34(8), 17051733.
Molloy, K., Saleh, S., & Shehu, A. (2013). Probabilistic search and energy guidance for biased
decoy sampling in ab-initio protein structure prediction. IEEE/ACM Trans Bioinf and Comp
Biol, 10(5), 11621175.
Molloy, K., & Shehu, A. (2013). Elucidating the ensemble of functionally-relevant transitions in
protein systems with a robotics-inspired method. BMC Struct Biol, 13(Suppl 1), S8.
Molloy, K., & Shehu, A. (2015). Interleaving global and local search for protein motion computation. In Harrison, R., Li, Y., & Mandoiu, I. (Eds.), LNCS: Bioinformatics Research and
Applications, Vol. 9096, pp. 175186, Norfolk, VA. Springer International Publishing.
Molloy, K., & Shehu, A. (2016). A general, adaptive, roadmap-based algorithm for protein motion
computation. IEEE Trans. NanoBioSci., 2(15), 158165.
Mukherjee, S., & Warshel, A. (2011). Electrostatic origin of the mechanochemical rotary mechanism and the catalytic dwell of F1-ATPase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 108(51), 2055020555.
Mukherjee, S., & Warshel, A. (2012). Realistic simulations of the coupling between the protomotive
force and the mechanical rotation of the F0-ATPase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 109(3), 14876
14881.
Mukherjee, S., & Warshel, A. (2013). Electrostatic origin of the unidirectionality of walking myosin
v motors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 110(43), 1732617331.
565

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

Na, H., & Song, G. (2015). Quantitative delineation of how breathing motions open ligand migration
channels in myoglobin and its mutants. Proteins: Struct Funct Bioinf, 83(4), 757770.
Neudecker, P., Robustelli, P., Cavalli, A., Walsh, P., Lundstrm, P., Zarrine-Afsar, A., Sharpe, S.,
Vendruscolo, M., & Kay, L. E. (2012). Structure of an intermediate state in protein folding
and aggregation. Science, 336(6079), 362366.
Nevo, R., Brumfeld, V., Kapon, R., Hinterdorfer, P., & Reich, Z. (2005). Direct measurement of
protein energy landscape roughness. EMBO Rep, 6(5), 482486.
Nielsen, C. L., & Kavraki, L. E. (2000). A two level fuzzy PRM for manipulation planning. In Intl
Conf Intell Robot Sys (IROS), Vol. 3, pp. 17161721, Takamatsu, Japan. IEEE/RSJ.
Noe, F., Doose, S., Daidone, I., Lollmann, M., Sauer, M., Chodera, J. D., & Smith, J. C. (2011).
Dynamical fingerprints for probing individual relaxation processes in biomolecular dynamics
with simulations and kinetic experiments. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 108(12), 48224827.
Noe, F., & Fischer, S. (2008). Transition networks for modeling the kinetics of conformational
change in macromolecules. Curr Opinion Struct Biol, 18(2), 154162.
Olson, B., Hashmi, I., Molloy, K., & Shehu, A. (2012). Basin hopping as a general and versatile
optimization framework for the characterization of biological macromolecules. Advances in
AI J, 2012(674832).
Olson, B., & Shehu, A. (2012). Evolutionary-inspired probabilistic search for enhancing sampling
of local minima in the protein energy surface. Proteome Sci, 10(Suppl 1), S5.
Olson, B. S., Molloy, K., Hendi, S.-F., & Shehu, A. (2012). Guiding search in the protein conformational space with structural profiles. J Bioinf & Comput Biol, 10(3), 1242005.
Onuchic, J. N., Luthey-Schulten, Z., & Wolynes, P. G. (1997). Theory of protein folding: The energy
landscape perspective. Annu Rev Phys Chem, 48, 545600.
Onuchic, J. N., & Wolynes, P. G. (2004). Theory of protein folding. Curr Opinion Struct Biol, 14,
7075.
Ovchinnikov, V., & Karplus, M. (2012). Analysis and elimination of a bias in targeted molecular
dynamics simulations of conformational transitions: Application to calmodulin. J Phys Chem
B, 116(29), 85848603.
Ozenne, V., Schneider, R., Yao, M., Huang, J. R., Salmon, L., Zweckstetter, M., Jensen, M. R., &
Blackledge, M. (2012). Mapping the potential energy landscape of intrinsically disordered
proteins at amino acid resolution. J Amer Chem Soc, 134(36), 1513815148.
Ozkan, S. B., Dill, K. A., & Bahar, I. (2002). Fast-folding protein kinetics, hidden intermediates,
and the sequential stabilization model. Protein Sci, 11(8), 19581970.
Palmieri, L., & Arras, K. O. (2015). Distance metric learning for RRT-based motion planning with
constant-time inference. In Intl Conf Robot Autom (ICRA), pp. 637643, Seattle, WA. IEEE.
Pande, V. S., Beachamp, K., & Bowman, G. R. (2010). Everything you wanted to know about
Markov state models but were afraid to ask. Nat Methods, 52(1), 99105.
Papoian, G. A., Ulander, J., Eastwood, M. P., Luthey-Schulten, Z., & Wolynes, P. G. (2004). Water
in protein structure prediction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 101(10), 33523357.
566

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

Perez-Hernandez, G., Paul, F., Giorgino, T., De Fabritiis, G., & Noe, F. (2013). Identification of slow
molecular order parameters for markov model construction. J Chem Phys, 139(1), 015102.
Perilla, J. R., Goh, B. C., Cassidy, C. K., Liu, B., Bernardi, R. C., Rudack, T., Yu, H., Wu, Z., &
Schulten, K. (2015). Molecular dynamics simulations of large macromolecular complexes.
Curr Opin Struct Biol, 31, 6474.
Phillips, D. C. (1967). The hen egg-white lysozyme molecule. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 57(3),
483495.
Phillips, J. C., Braun, R., Wang, W., Gumbart, J., Tajkhorshid, E., Villa, E., Chipot, C., Skeel, R. D.,
Kale, L., & Schulten, K. (2005). Scalable molecular dynamics with NAMD. J Comput Chem,
26(16), 17811802.
Piana, S., Lindorff-Larsen, K., Dirks, R. M., Salmon, J. K., Dror, R. O., & Shaw, D. E. (2012a).
Evaluating the effects of cutoffs and treatment of long-range electrostatics in protein folding
simulations. PLoS ONE, 7(6), e39918.
Piana, S., Lindorff-Larsen, K., & Shaw, D. E. (2012b). Protein folding kinetics and thermodynamics
from atomistic simulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 109(44), 1784517850.
Plaku, E. (2015). Region-guided and sampling-based tree search for motion planning with dynamics. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 31(3), 723735.
Plaku, E., Stamati, H., Clementi, C., & Kavraki, L. E. (2007). Fast and reliable analysis of molecular motions using proximity relations and dimensionality reduction. Proteins: Struct Funct
Bioinf, 67(4), 897907.
Plaku, E., Kavraki, L. E., & Vardi, M. Y. (2010). Motion planning with dynamics by a synergistic
combination of layers of planning. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 26(3), 469482.
Ponder, J. W., & Case, D. A. (2003). Force fields for protein simulations. Adv Protein Chem, 66,
2785.
Porta, J. M., & Jaillet, L. (2013). Exploring the energy landscapes of flexible molecular loops using
higher-dimensional continuation. J Comput Chem, 34(3), 234244.
Porta, J. M., Thomas, F., Corcho, F., Canto, J., & Perez, J. J. (2007). Complete maps of molecularloop conformation spaces. J Comput Chem, 28(13), 21702189.
Prinz, J. H., Keller, B., & Noe, F. (2011a). Probing molecular kinetics with Markov models:
metastable states, transition pathways and spectroscopic observables. Phys Chem Chem Phys,
13(38), 1691216927.
Prinz, J. H., Wu, H., Sarich, M., Keller, B., Senne, M., Held, M., Chodera, J. D., Schutte, C., & Noe,
F. (2011b). Markov models of molecular kinetics: generation and validation. J Chem Phys,
134(17), 174105.
Proctor, A. J., Lipscomb, T. J., Zou, A., Anderson, J. A., & Cho, S. S. (2012). Performance analyses
of a parallel verlet neighbor list algorithm for GPU-optimized MD simulations. In ASE/IEEE
Intl Conf Biomed Comput (BioMedCom), pp. 1419, Alexandria, VA. IEEE.
Ramachandran, G. N., Ramakrishnan, C., & Sasisekharan, V. (1963). Stereochemistry of polypeptide chain configurations. J Mol Biol, 7, 9599.
567

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

Raveh, B., Enosh, A., Furman-Schueler, O., & Halperin, D. (2009). Rapid sampling of molecular
motions with prior information constraints,. PLoS Comput Biol, 5(2), e1000295.
Rodriguez, S., Thomas, S., Pearce, R., & Amato, N. (2006a). RESAMPL: A Region-Sensitive
Adaptive Motion Planner. In Workshop Algorithm Found Robot, Vol. 47 of Springer Tracts
in Advanced Robotics, pp. 285300. Springer, New York, NY.
Rodriguez, S., Tang, X., Lien, J.-M., & Amato, N. M. (2006b). An obstacle-based rapidly-exploring
random tree. In Intl Conf Robot Autom (ICRA), pp. 895900, Orlando, FL. IEEE.
Rohrdanz, M. A., Zheng, W., Maggioni, M., & Clementi, C. (2011). Determination of reaction
coordinates via locally scaled diffusion map. J Chem Phys, 134(12), 124116.
Rose, G. D., Fleming, P. J., Banavar, J. R., & Maritan, A. (2006). A backbone-based theory of
protein folding. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 103(45), 1662316633.
Roweis, S. T., & Saul, L. K. (2000). Nonlinear dimensionality reduction by locally linear embedding. Science, 290(5500), 23232326.
Roy, R., Hohng, S., & Ha, T. (2008). A practical guide to single-molecule FRET. Nat Methods,
5(6), 507516.
Rychkova, A., Mukherjee, S., Bora, R. P., & Warshel, A. (2013). Simulating the pulling of stalled
elongated peptide from the ribosome by the translocon. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 110(25),
1019510200.
Sanchez, G., & Latombe, J.-C. (2002). On delaying collision checking in PRM planning: Application to multi-robot coordination. Intl J Robot Res, 21(1), 526.
Sapin, E., Carr, D. B., De Jong, K. A., & Shehu, A. (2016). Computing energy landscape maps and
structural excursions of proteins. BMC Genomics, 17(Suppl 4), 456.
Schlau-Cohen, G. S., Wang, Q., Southall, J., Cogdell, R. J., & Moerner, W. E. (2013). Singlemolecule spectroscopy reveals photosynthetic LH2 complexes switch between emissive
states. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 110(27), 1089910903.
Schotte, F., Lim, M., Jackson, T. A., Smirnov, A. V., Soman, J., Olson, J. S., Phillips, G. N., Wulff,
M., & Anfinrud, P. A. (2003). Watching a protein as it functions with 150-ps time-resolved
X-ray crystallography. Science, 300(5627), 19441947.
Schuyler, A. d., Jernigan, R. L., Wasba, P. K., Ramakrishnan, B., & Chirikjian, G. S. (2009). Iterative
cluster-NMA (icnma): a tool for generating conformational transitions in proteins. Proteins:
Struct Funct Bioinf, 74(3), 760776.
Shatsky, M., Nussinov, R., & Wolfson, H. J. (2002). Flexible protein alignment and hinge detection.
Proteins, 48(2), 242256.
Shaw, D. E., Maragakis, P., Lindorff-Larsen, K., Piana, S., Dror, R. O., Eastwood, M. P., Bank, J. A.,
Jumper, J. M., Salmon, J. K., Shan, Y., & Wriggers, W. (2010). Atomic-level characterization
of the structural dynamics of proteins. Science, 330(6002), 341346.
Shehu, A. (2009). An ab-initio tree-based exploration to enhance sampling of low-energy protein
conformations. In Robot: Sci and Sys, pp. 241248, Seattle, WA, USA.
Shehu, A. (2013). Probabilistic search and optimization for protein energy landscapes. In Aluru, S.,
& Singh, A. (Eds.), Handbook of Computational Molecular Biology. Chapman & Hall/CRC
Computer & Information Science Series.
568

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

Shehu, A., Clementi, C., & Kavraki, L. E. (2006). Modeling protein conformational ensembles:
From missing loops to equilibrium fluctuations. Proteins: Struct Funct Bioinf, 65(1), 164
179.
Shehu, A., Clementi, C., & Kavraki, L. E. (2007). Sampling conformation space to model equilibrium fluctuations in proteins. Algorithmica, 48(4), 303327.
Shehu, A., & Kavraki, L. E. (2012). Modeling structures and motions of loops in protein molecules.
Entropy J, 14(2), 252290.
Shehu, A., Kavraki, L. E., & Clementi, C. (2007). On the characterization of protein native state
ensembles. Biophys J, 92(5), 15031511.
Shehu, A., Kavraki, L. E., & Clementi, C. (2008). Unfolding the fold of cyclic cysteine-rich peptides. Protein Sci, 17(3), 482493.
Shehu, A., Kavraki, L. E., & Clementi, C. (2009). Multiscale characterization of protein conformational ensembles. Proteins: Struct Funct Bioinf, 76(4), 837851.
Shehu, A., & Olson, B. (2010). Guiding the search for native-like protein conformations with an
ab-initio tree-based exploration. Intl J Robot Res, 29(8), 110611227.
Shkolnik, A., Walter, M., & Tedrake, R. (2009). Reachability-guided sampling for planning under
differential constraints. In Intl Conf Robot Autom (ICRA), pp. 28592865.
Shlens,
J.
(2003).
A
tutorial
on
principal
component
https://www.cs.princeton.edu/picasso/mats/PCA-Tutorial-Intuition jp.pdf.

analysis.

Shukla, D., Hernandez, C. X., Weber, J. K., & Pande, V. S. (2015). Markov state models provide
insights into dynamic modulation of protein function. Acc Chem Res, 48(2), 414422.
Singh, A. P., Latombe, J.-C., & Brutlag, D. L. (1999). A motion planning approach to flexible ligand
binding. In Schneider, R., Bork, P., Brutlag, D. L., Glasgow, J. I., Mewes, H.-W., & Zimmer,
R. (Eds.), Intl Conf Intell Sys Mol Biol (ISMB), Vol. 7, pp. 252261, Heidelberg, Germany.
AAAI.
Singhal, N., & Pande, V. S. (2005). Error analysis and efficient sampling in markovian state models
for molecular dynamics. J Chem Phys, 123(20), 204909120490913.
Singhal, N., Snow, C. D., & Pande, V. S. (2004). Using path sampling to build better markovian
state models: Predicting the folding rate and mechanism of a tryptophan zipper beta hairpin.
J Chem Phys, 121(1), 415425.
Socher, E., & Imperiali, B. (2013). FRET-CAPTURE: A sensitive method for the detection of
dynamic protein interactions. Chem Biochem, 14(1), 5357.
Song, G., & Amato, N. M. (2000). A motion-planning approach to folding: From paper craft to
protein folding. Tech. rep. TR00-001, Department of Computer Science, Texas A & M University.
Song, G., & Amato, N. M. (2004). A motion planning approach to folding: From paper craft to
protein folding. IEEE Trans Robot Autom, 20(1), 6071.
Song, J., & Zhuang, W. (2014). Simulating the peptide folding kinetic related spectra based on the
Markov state model. In Protein Conformational Dynamics, Vol. 805 of Adv Exp Med Biol,
pp. 199220. Springer.
569

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

Soto, C. (2008). Protein misfolding and neurodegeneration. JAMA Neurology, 65(2), 184189.
Stadler, P. (2002). Fitness landscapes. Appl Math & Comput, 117, 187207.
Stone, J. E., Phillips, J. C., Freddolino, P. L., Hardy, D. J., Trabuco, L. G., & Schulten, K. (2007).
Accelerating molecular modeling applications with graphics processors. J Comput Chem,
28(16), 26182640.
Sucan, I. A., & Kavraki, L. E. (2012). A sampling-based tree planner for systems with complex
dynamics. IEEE Trans Robotics, 28(1), 116131.
Sun, Z., Hsu, D., Jiang, T., Kurniawati, H., & Reif, J. (2005). Narrow passage sampling for probabilistic roadmap planners. IEEE Trans Robotics, 21(6), 11051115.
Tama, F., & Sanejouand, Y. H. (2001). Conformational change of proteins arising from normal
mode calculations. Protein Eng, 14(1), 16.
Tama, F., Valle, M., Frank, J., & Brooks, C. L. (2003). Dynamic reorganization of the functionally
active ribosome explored by normal mode analysis and cryo-electron microscopy. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA, 100(16), 93199323.
Tang, X., Kirkpatrick, B., Thomas, S., Song, G., & Amato, N. (2005). Using motion planning to
study rna folding kinetics. J Comput Biol, 12(6), 862881.
Tang, X., Thomas, S., Tapia, L., Giedroc, D. P., & Amato, N. (2008). Simulating rna folding kinetics
on approximated energy landscapes. J Mol Biol, 381(4), 10551067.
Tanner, D. E., Phillips, J. C., & Schulten, K. (2012). GPU/CPU algorithm for generalized
born/solvent-accessible surface area implicit solvent calculations. J Chem Theory Comput,
8(7), 25212530.
Tapia, L., Tang, X., Thomas, S., & Amato, N. (2007). Kinetics analysis methods for approximate
folding landscapes. Bioinformatics, 23, i539i548.
Tapia, L., Thomas, S., & Amato, N. (2010). A motion planning approach to studying molecular
motions. Commun Inf Sys, 10(1), 5368.
Teknipar, M., & Zheng, W. (2010). Predicting order of conformational changes during protein
conformational transitions using an interpolated elastic network model. Proteins: Struct Funct
Bioinf, 78(11), 24692481.
Tenenbaum, J. B., de Silva, V., & Langford, J. C. (2000). A global geometric framework for nonlinear dimensionality reduction. Science, 290(5500), 23192323.
Teodoro, M., Phillips, G. N. J., & Kavraki, L. E. (2003). Understanding protein flexibility through
dimensionality reduction. J Comput Biol, 10(3-4), 617634.
Thomas, S., Song, G., & Amato, N. M. (2005). Protein folding by motion planning. J. Phys. Biol.,
2(4), 148.
Thomas, S., Tang, X., Tapia, L., & Amato, N. M. (2007). Simulating protein motions with rigidity
analysis. J. Comput. Biol., 14(6), 839855.
Thorpe, M. F., & Ming, L. (2004). Macromolecular flexibility. Phil. Mag., 84(13-16), 132331137.
Torella, J. P., Holden, S. J., Santoso, Y., Hohlbein, J., & Kapanidis, A. N. (2011). Identifying molecular dynamics in single-molecule FRET experiments with burst variance analysis. Biophys J,
100(6), 15681577.
570

fiC OMPUTATIONAL T REATMENTS OF B IOMOLECULES BY ROBOTICS -I NSPIRED M ETHODS

Tsai, C., Kumar, S., Ma, B., & Nussinov, R. (1999a). Folding funnels, binding funnels, and protein
function. Protein Sci, 8(6), 11811190.
Tsai, C., Ma, B., & Nussinov, R. (1999b). Folding and binding cascades: shifts in energy landscapes.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 96(18), 99709972.
Uversky, V. N. (2009). Intrinsic disorder in proteins associated with neurodegenerative diseases. In
Protein Folding and Misfolding: Neurodegenerative Diseases, Vol. 14 of Focus on Structural
Biology, pp. 51885238. Springer.
van den Bedem, H., Lotan, I., Latombe, J.-C., & Deacon, A. M. (2005). Real-space protein-model
completion: an inverse-kinematics approach. Acta Crystallogr, D61(1), 213.
van der Maaten, L. J. P., Postma, E. O., & van den Herik, H. J. (2009). Dimensionality reduction:
A comparative review. J Mach Learn Res, 10(1-41), 6671.
Van Der Spoel, D., Lindahl, E., Hess, B., Groenhof, G., Mark, A. E., & Berendsen, H. J. (2005).
GROMACS: fast, flexible, and free. J Comput Chem, 26(16), 17011718.
van Gunsteren, W. F., Billeter, S. R., Eising, A. A., Hunenberger, P. H., Kruger, P., Mark, A. E.,
Scott, W. R. P., & Tironi, I. G. (1996). Biomolecular simulation: the gromos96 manual and
user guide. http://www.gromos.net/.
Verlet, L. (1967). Computer experiments on classical fluids. i. thermodynamical properties of
Lennard-Jones molecules. Phys Rev Lett, 159, 98103.
Warshel, A. (2003). Computer simulations of enzyme catalysis: Methods, progress, and insights.
Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct, 32, 425443.
Warshel, A., & Levitt, M. (1976). Theoretical studies of enzymatic reactions: Dielectric, electrostatic and steric stabilization of the carbonium ion in the reaction of lysozyme. J Mol Biol,
103(2), 227249.
Weber, J. K., Jack, R. L., & Pande, V. S. (2013). Emergence of glass-like behavior in markov state
models of protein folding dynamics. J Amer Chem Soc, 135(15), 55015504.
Wells, S., Menor, S., Hespenheide, B., & Thorpe, M. F. (2005). Constrained geometric simulation
of diffusive motion in proteins. J Phys Biol, 2(4), 127136.
Xu, D., & Zhang, Y. (2012). Ab initio protein structure assembly using continuous structure fragments and optimized knowledge-based force field. Proteins: Struct Funct Bioinf, 80(7), 1715
1735.
Yang, H., Wu, H., Li, D., Han, L., & Huo, S. (2007). Temperature-dependent probabilistic roadmap
algorithm for calculating variationally optimized conformational transition pathways. J Chem
Theory Comput, 3(1), 1725.
Yang, L., Song, G., Carriquiry, A., & Jernigan, R. L. (2008). Close correspondence between the essential protein motions from principal component analysis of multiple HIV-1 protease structures and elastic network modes. Structure, 16(2), 321330.
Yang, Z., Majek, P., & Bahar, I. (2009). Allosteric transitions of supramolecular systems explored
by network models: Application to chaperonin GroEL. PLoS Comput Biol, 5(4), e1000360.
Yao, P., Dhanik, A., Marz, N., Propper, R., Kou, C., Liu, G., van den Bedem, H., Latombe, J. C.,
Halperin-Landsberg, I., & Altman, R. B. (2008). Efficient algorithms to explore conformation
spaces of flexible protein loops. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinf, 5(4), 534545.
571

fiS HEHU & P LAKU

Zagrovic, B., Snow, C. D., Shirts, M. R., & Pande, V. S. (2002). Simulation of folding of a small
alpha-helical protein in atomistic detail using worldwide-distributed computing. J Mol Biol,
323(5), 927937.
Zhang, M., & Kavraki, L. E. (2002a). Finding solutions of the inverse kinematics problem in
computer-aided drug design. In Florea, L., Walenz, B., & Hannenhalli, S. (Eds.), Currents in
Computational Molecular Biology, pp. 214215, Washington, D.C. ACM.
Zhang, M., & Kavraki, L. E. (2002b). A new method for fast and accurate derivation of molecular
conformations. Chem Inf Comput Sci, 42(1), 6470.
Zhao, G., Perilla, J. R., Yufenyuy, E. L., Meng, X., Chen, B., Ning, J., Ahn, J., Gronenborn, A. M.,
Schulten, K., Aiken, C., & Zhang, P. (2013). Mature HIV-1 capsid structure by cryo-electron
microscopy and all-atom molecular dynamics. Nature, 497(7451), 643646.
Zheng, W., & Brooks, B. (2005). Identification of dynamical correlations within the myosin motor
domain by the normal mode analysis of an elastic network model. J Mol Biol, 346(3), 745
759.
Zheng, W., Brooks, B. R., & Hummer, G. (2007). Protein conformational transitions explored by
mixed elastic network models. Proteins: Struct Funct Bioinf, 69(1), 4357.
Zheng, W., & Doniach, S. (2003). A comparative study of motor-protein motions by using a simple
elastic-network model. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 100(23), 1325313258.
Zheng, W., Rohrdanz, M. A., & Clementi, C. (2013). Rapid exploration of configuration space with
diffusion-map-directed molecular dynamics. J Phys Chem B, 117(42), 1276912776.
Zheng, W., Rohrdanz, M. A., Maggioni, M., & Clementi, C. (2011). Polymer reversal rate calculated
via locally scaled diffusion map. J Chem Phys, 134(14), 144109.
Zhou, H. (2014). Theoretical frameworks for multiscale modeling and simulation. Curr Opinion
Struct Biol, 25, 6776.

572

fi