Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 24 (2005) 465-518

Submitted 09/04; published 10/05

Reasoning about Action:
An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach
Quoc Bao Vo

vqbao@cs.rmit.edu.au

School of Computer Science and Information Technology
RMIT University
GPO Box 2476V, Melbourne, VIC 3001, Australia

Norman Y. Foo

norman@cse.unsw.edu.au

Knowledge Systems Group
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia

Abstract
We present a uniform non-monotonic solution to the problems of reasoning about action
on the basis of an argumentation-theoretic approach. Our theory is provably correct relative
to a sensible minimisation policy introduced on top of a temporal propositional logic.
Sophisticated problem domains can be formalised in our framework. As much attention of
researchers in the field has been paid to the traditional and basic problems in reasoning
about actions such as the frame, the qualification and the ramification problems, approaches
to these problems within our formalisation lie at heart of the expositions presented in this
paper.

1. Motivation and Introduction
The need for a good reasoning about action formalism is apparent for research in artificial
intelligence (AI). Alongside the logicist point of view to artificial intelligence, more recently,
there emerges the cognitivist and situated action-based approaches(see Kushmerick, 1996
and the references therein). The latter approaches provide some immediate and practical
answers to certain issues of AI. The current problem domains for (Soccer) Robot Cup
seem to be an area where these approaches promise to gain fruitful results. On the other
hand, the logicist approach aims at long term solutions for the general problems of AI.
From a logicist approach, formalising dynamic domains for reasoning about action can
be realised within a logical knowledge representation. The general idea is that intelligent
agents should be able to represent all kinds of knowledge in a uniform way such that some
general problem solver can fully employ and find a solution based on their knowledge. As
it turns out, there are difficulties with such a general approach to AI. Consider the task of
formalising dynamic domains in some logical language. To formalise the dynamics of an
action (or event) in a language with n fluents 1 , one will need to axiomatise not only about
the fluents that are effected by the action but also about those that are not. Essentially, it
requires that n axioms be asserted. Such a formalisation can hardly be considered a good
1. fluent is a technical term referring to functions or predicates whose values can be varied relative to time.
c
2005
AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

fiVo & Foo

representation. Hence, there is the need to solve this problem in logic-based reasoning about
action formalisms. This is the well known frame problem as introduced by McCarthy and
Hayes (1969). Moreover, there is still a problem in axiomatising the effects of an action,
called the effect axioms. A logical axiomatisation requires that the conditions under which
the effects will take place after executing the action be precisely specified. However, there
are potentially infinitely many such conditions, some of which the reasoner may never have
thought about. No realistic formalisation would ever be able to exhaustively enumerate all
of those conditions. Nonetheless, to start a car, most people only worry about whether they
have the key to that car. They never bother checking whether there is something blocking
the tailpipe or checking all electric circuits to make sure that they are all well connected.
Such a story has long been well-known within the community of commonsense reasoning,
in particular reasoning about action. This is known as the qualification problem and was
introduced by McCarthy (1977).
While there have been a number of solutions to the frame problem (e.g., Shanahan, 1997;
Reiter, 1991; Castilho, Gasquet, & Herzig, 1999), the qualification problem has largely been
ignored with the notable exception of Thielschers (2001) solution within the Fluent Calculus and Doherty and Kvarnstroms (1998) circumscription-based solution using fluent
dependency constraints. Some people argue that the frame problem is already very challenging and it would be a good approach to thoroughly solve the frame problem before
complicating a formalism with the qualification problem. We argue that there is a danger
of approaching these problems from that point of view for (at least) two reasons:
1. It may be very hard to come up with a uniform solution for all problems: while many
existing solutions for the frame problem are monotonic (e.g., Reiter, 1991; Castilho
et al., 1999), the qualification problem inherently requires a non-monotonic solution.
This is the case with the original qualification problem as stated by McCarthy (1977)
for the dynamics of actions/events need to be finitely axiomatisable and when an
unexpected qualification for an action arises, the agent must necessarily retract his
initial expectation that the effects caused by the action would take place, making the
underlying reasoning machinery non-monotonic (see section 1.2 for a discussion on
the qualification problem).
2. Many solutions to the frame problem can only succeed under some precise assumptions.
For instance,
 Actions always succeed. This is the action omniscience assumption. More precisely, this assumption dictates that the qualification problem is skipped. This
is the case with all monotonic solutions to the frame problem. 2
 Fluents change if and only if the reasoner knows that there exists an action
that possibly changes its value. This can be termed as domain omniscience
2. The argument that any solution to the frame problem which works with nondeterministic action is not
subject to this assumption does not stand. The quick fix of allowing such an approach to a fortiori express
actions that may fail by representing failure as a possible effect is an invalid one. It is because we can
no longer infer that, in the absence of evidences that suggest otherwise, actions would normally succeed.
Its also worth noting that Lins (1996) extension of Reiters (1991) solution to the frame problem in the
Situation Calculus to deal with nondeterministic action is based on circumscription.

466

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

assumption. It assumes that the reasoner has complete (ontological) knowledge
of the domain about which he is reasoning.
The above two reasons are of course closely related as the former arises due to the
underlying assumptions in the latter which no longer holds once the qualification problem
is taken into consideration.
In the remainder of this section, we review several works on this topic before introducing
the reader to our approach.
1.1 The Frame Problem
In the late 1960s, the frame problem had been recognised as a major obstacle to formalising
dynamic domains (see the discussions and exposition by McCarthy & Hayes, 1969; Green,
1969). Several alternative responses to the frame problem have been proposed along way.
To respond to the explosive number of axioms required for theorem proving-based planners
as proposed by Green (1969), Fikes and Nilsson (1971) introduce procedures that operate
on special data structures used to represent dynamic domains. However, for complex and
sophisticated problem domains, e.g. those with domain constraints, concurrent actions,
observations at different time points, etc. STRIPS quite often fails to express the domain
knowledge. In fact, the expressivity of STRIPS is quite limited as has been pointed out
by Lifschitz (1987). Another response attributing the frame problem as an artefact of
the situation calculus has proved to be ungrounded. There are attempts to distinguish
a logical or epistemological aspect of the frame problem from the computational aspect
(e.g., McDermott, 1987; Kowalski, 1992). While the computational inefficiency associated
with a representation of dynamic domains in the situation calculus can be attributed to
the explosive number of global situations required by the situation calculus as argued by
Kowalski and Sergot (1986), the logical aspect of the frame problem is inherent to any
logic-based representation of dynamic domains. It is thus essential that a logical approach
to AI and knowledge representation have a decent solution to the frame problem.
Later, with the introduction of the qualification problem by McCarthy (1977), it is
reckoned that formalising dynamic domains not only is about solving the frame problem
but would require systematic studies to fundamental issues of knowledge representation. In
the early 1980s, the frame and the qualification problem were considered to be instances
of commonsense reasoning problems. In particular, many believed that a non-monotonic
reasoning framework would solve the frame problem. It was argued that the principle of
inertia3 which is considered to be the key to the frame problem can be formalised in terms
of default rules or default axioms in default reasoning. Moreover, it was also argued that to
solve the qualification problem, the following common sense law should be rendered: an
action, by default, would qualify to succeed and bring about the intended effects unless there
is known reason for it not to, in formalisations of dynamic domains.
With the introduction of several non-monotonic reasoning formalisms, e.g. truth maintenance systems (TMSs) by Doyle (1979), default logics by Reiter (1980), circumscriptive
approaches by McCarthy (1980), modal non-monotonic logic by McDermott and Doyle
3. The principle of inertia or the common sense law of inertia basically states that By default a fluent
is assumed to persist over time unless there is evidence to believe otherwise. The reader is referred to
Shanahans (1997) book for more details on this principle and the issues around it.

467

fiVo & Foo

(1980), autoepistemic logic by Moore (1985), etc., it was believed that these problems were
solved. The solutions to these problems were illustrated as examples for the proposed nonmonotonic reasoning frameworks. For instance, McCarthy (1986) showed how circumscription is used to solve the frame problem relative to the blocks world domain. Unfortunately,
Hanks and McDermott (1987) show that these formalisations do not work correctly in a
simple dynamic domain known as the Yale Shooting Problem (YSP). We will now review
successful attempts to solve the frame problem:
1. Baker (1989) successfully modifies the original (and incorrect) circumscription policy
proposed by McCarthy (1986) to deal with the Yale Shooting Problem. In the traditional circumscriptive policy, the predicate Abnormal is minimised with the predicate
Holds allowed to vary. Baker suggests that, instead of allowing Holds to vary, the
function Result should be the one to be varied. While this does not solve the frame
problem in its full generality, this initiates the line of research which brings many
fruitful results to reasoning about action community. For a more detailed discussion
about these solutions and the follow up works, the reader is referred to Shanahans
(1997) book. Furthermore, Foo, Zhang, Vo, and Peppas (2001) present an exposition on the issue from an automata and system theory point of view. In order for
Bakers (1989) solution to work correctly, additional axioms need to be introduced,
e.g. domain closure axioms, axioms about the existence of situations, etc. This emphasises that: (i) the circumscriptive approach to reasoning about action only works
under careful designation and considerations of the domain; and more importantly,
(ii) circumscription is domain dependent. That is, a domain dependent circumscriptive policy is required to correctly render the common sense of a particular problem
domain.
2. A number of researchers argue that in many cases, a monotonic solution to the frame
problem will be sufficient. Pednault (1989) assumes that the effect of actions on fluents
are specified by effect axioms of the following forms:
x, ~y , s)  F (~x, do(A(~y ), s)),
+
F (~
x, ~y , s)

F (~

 F (~x, do(A(~y ), s)),

(1)
(2)

Here, A(~y ) and F (~x, s) are the parameterised action and fluent, respectively;  +
x, ~y , s)
F (~
and 
(~
x
,
~
y
,
s)
are
first
order
formulas
whose
free
variables
are
among
~
x
,
~
y
,
s.
Pednault
F
(1989) makes the following Causal Completeness Assumption:
The axioms (1) and (2) specify all the causal laws relating the action A
and the fluent F .
Note that the Causal Completeness Assumption is a stronger form of the domain
omniscience assumption presented above. Under this assumption, the following frame
axioms can be introduced:
F (~x, s)  
x, ~y , s)  F (~x, do(A(~y ), s)).
F (~
468

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

and
F (~x, s)  +
x, ~y , s)  F (~x, do(A(~y ), s)).
F (~
Schubert (1990), elaborating on a proposal of Haas (1987), employs the so-called
Explanation Closure Axioms of the following forms:

F (~x, s)  F (~x, do(A, s))  F (~x, A, s),

(3)

F (~x, s)  F (~x, do(A, s))  F (~x, A, s),

(4)

Or, equivalently, we can rewrite the above two axioms as follows:

F (~x, s)  F (~x, A, s)  F (~x, do(A, s)).
and
F (~x, s)  F (~x, A, s)  F (~x, do(A, s)).
Schuberts proposal is correct under the following assumption, called the Explanation Closure Assumption:
F completely characterises all those actions A that can cause the fluent
F s truth value to change from true to false; similarly for  F .
Reiter (1991) then combines the merits of the above two proposals by systematically
generating the frame axioms as proposed by Pednault (1989) with the quantifiers over
the set of actions as proposed by Haas (1987) and Schubert (1990).
Other researchers who also propose monotonic solution to the frame problem include
Castilho et al. (1999), and Zhang and Foo (2002).
3. Attempts to solve the frame problem using default logic (Reiter, 1980) also encounter
some problematic issues. Hanks and McDermott (1987) show that a natural formulation of the Yale Shooting Problem in default logic suffers the same problem as that
with circumscriptive approaches, viz. the existence of anomalous extensions. Morris
(1988) proposes a slight modification on Hanks and McDermotts original formulation
to the Yale Shooting Problem in an attempt to avoid the anomalous extensions. As
pointed out by Turner (1997), Morris formulation is complete, and thus eliminates the
anomalous extensions in the Yale Shooting Problem, but unsound. More importantly,
from Morris formulation it is not clear how dynamic domains should be formulated
in general. Turner (1997) himself then proposes a way to formalise dynamic domains
using default logic (and also logic programming). His solution is based on the following observation: In the Yale Shooting domain and similar dynamic domains, the
anomalous extensions arise because undesired effects of an action can be derived by
reasoning backward in time. For instance, in the Yale Shooting domain, by making
469

fiVo & Foo

the counterintuitive supposition that the victim of the shooting is somehow still alive
after the shooting, an anomalous extension come up in the following way. First, it
allows the default saying that the victim persists to be alive regarding the shooting
action to be applicable. As a consequence, the gun must not be loaded before the
shooting action. Therefore, it blocks the application of the default saying that the
gun persists to be loaded regarding the waiting action. In other words, the loaded
gun would get unloaded (magically) during the waiting action which is an undesirable conclusion. To block these lines of backward reasoning, Turner appeals to the
non-contrapositivity of inference rules and replaces the implications by inference rules.
To guarantee that this formulation work correctly, additional techniques are required
such as a fact  will be formulated as an inference rule:

false
and enforcing the completeness of the initial situation by adding the following rules:
: Holds(f, S0 )
Holds(f, S0 )

: Holds(f, S0 )
Holds(f, S0 )

for every fluent f .
However, Turners (1997) formulation is still fairly ad hoc as different techniques are
added to fix the known issues. For example, the inference rules are used in place of
implications to block the application of the undesirable backward reasoning, the
rules completing the initial situations are added to overcome the unsoundness issue in
Morris (1988) formulation, etc. This also shows the problematic side of default logic as
a uniform formalisation to various problems of common sense reasoning. This becomes
a serious issue if one proceeds with the question of how the qualification problem, a
typical problem of default reasoning, is solved in Turners (1997) formalisation of
dynamic domains. This is the case, for example, when instead of asserting that the
victim dies whenever it is shot by a loaded gun the reasoner can only maintain that as
a default proposition as there may be many hidden possible conditions under which
the victim may not die. Thus the reasoner is able to deal with surprising situations
in which the victim is observed to be still alive after the shooting action (of a loaded
gun). Another, symmetric, case is with surprises regarding the persistence of fluents.
For instance, after a waiting action, which is not supposed to unload a gun, the gun,
which was loaded before the wait action, is observed to be unloaded. Such a scenario
was first introduced by Kautz (1986) in a scenario called the Stolen Car Problem.
In both cases, reasoning backward in time is necessary. It is not clear how these
will be rendered in Turners formulation which explicitly intends to block backward
reasoning. These scenarios will be analysed in the solution we present later in this
paper.
1.2 The Qualification Problem
While there have been several solutions to the qualification problem, none of these addressed
the original qualification problem introduced by McCarthy (1977) and later formalised by
Ginsberg and Smith (1988).
470

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

1. Lin and Reiter (1994) propose a formalisation for action theories in the situation calculus (SC). Their formalism is an extension of Reiters (1991) solution to the frame
problem (sometimes) by incorporating state constraints. They discover that there are
at least two different kinds of state constraints which they call ramification and qualification constraints. They then go further to claim a solution to the qualification (and
the ramification) problem. The basic idea behind their solution to the qualification
problem is that certain state constraints imply implicit preconditions of some actions.
Thus an action may not be qualified even though it appears (from the explicit action
description) to be. While this is of course a special case of the qualification problem, the classical qualification problem as introduced by McCarthy (1977) has a much
broader extent. In this setting, the qualification problem is more a pragmatic issue
than a technical issue. Similar to the frame problem, it is impractical, and sometimes
impossible, to axiomatise all the possible preconditions of an action. For example, in
addition to the requirement that the gun be loaded, to guarantee that performing the
action shoot would kill the victim, many preconditions must also be included such as:
the gun is not malfunctioning, the shooter does not miss the victim, the victim does
not wear a bullet-proof jacket, etc. among which some may be very improbable such
as: no alien interferes with the bullet. The reasoner simply does not want to consider these conditions by assuming that they are not the case unless there are explicit
evidences stating otherwise. In other words, the qualification problem in its original
form requires that the reasoner be able to tolerate the mistaken conclusions possibly
jumped to by previous inferences and to correct them appropriately. Henceforth, we
will always refer to the qualification problem in this original form. It is this similarity
to the frame problem that led John McCarthy to conjecture that:
The frame problem may be a sub-case of what we call the qualification
problem, and a good solution of the qualification problem may solve the
frame problem also.
(McCarthy, 1977, p. 1040, italics are original.)
Roughly 10 years after his introduction of the qualification problem, McCarthy (1986)
presented his solution to the problem using his non-monotonic formalism of circumscription. However, this solution suffers an almost identical flaw as its counterpart
regarding the frame problem: simple minimisation of abnormalities sanctions anomalous models (e.g., Thielscher, 2001).
2. McCain and Turner (1995) propose a solution to the problem described by Lin and
Reiter (1994), viz. the problem of deriving the implicit preconditions from state
constraints. McCain and Turners solution is posed in a model-based representation
of action theories.
3. Similar to McCain and Turners (1995) result, Baral (1995) offers a solution to the
problem defined by Lin and Reiter using a state-based representation. Baral extends
the language of disjunctive logic programs for state specification and as an action
description language.
471

fiVo & Foo

4. Doherty and Kvarnstrom (1998) make a careful investigation to the qualification problem. They are aware of the shortcomings present in the definition of the qualification
problem introduced by Lin and Reiter (1994). They proceed one step further to distinguish between the weak and strong forms of the qualification problem. To deal
comprehensively with the qualification problem in its full extent, Doherty and Kvarnstrom apply circumscription on a predicate which plays a similar role to the predicate
P oss used by Lin and Reiter (1994).
Even though Doherty and Kvarnstroms (1998) solution is closest in spirit to the
original form of the qualification problem, there is still a serious problem with their
approach. The intended designation on predicate P oss and its variants is actionoriented. That is, it would qualify on the executability condition for the action under
consideration, not towards the effects that action is supposed to cause. In other
words, only circumscribing P oss does not guarantee to capture the full extent of
the qualification problem. For example, a single action of shooting a gun may cause
several effects: killing the victim, making a loud noise, emptying the cartridge, etc.
The conditions for such an action to be executable is: having the gun, the gun is not
broken, the gun is loadable, etc. Once the action is executable, it is not necessary
that all effects will take place. It may be the case that there is a loud noise and the
cartridge is emptied but the victim is still alive since the victim was wearing a bulletproof jacket. Assuming that the reasoner is somehow aware about this possibility,
should he include the requirement that the victim not wear a bullet-proof jacket as a
qualification for the action shoot? Perhaps he should not for he would still expect to
hear a loud noise and the cartridge to be emptied after the shoot action.
These are not the end of all the troubles though. The presence of both qualification
and ramification constraints causes several complications. Firstly, they are not syntactically distinguishable. Secondly, as has been mentioned by Doherty and Kvarnstrom
(1998), qualification constraints may cause indirect effects to arise and vice versa, i.e.
ramification constraints may reveal implicit action preconditions.
Remark: The terms ramification constraints and qualification constraints were first
introduced by Lin and Reiter (1994) when a careful examination to state constraints
was taken. As discussed by Doherty and Kvarnstrom (1998), these two kinds of constraints might interact in several ways. Consider the example introduced by Doherty
and Kvarnstrom (1998): the only preconditions of the action board a plane are havingticket and at-gate. However, to a passenger who places a gun into his pocket at home
before travelling to the airport and proceeding to the gate, a new qualification for
the action board materialises. Because one ramification of putting an object in your
pocket is that it will stay with you as you travel from location to location (i.e. result of
a ramification constraint), a reasoner could easily conjecture that our passenger fails
to board the plane. On the other hand, the fact that a passenger who possesses a gun
when trying to board the plane must fail to board the plane is a result of a qualification
constraint. Now, not only the fact that a passenger possesses a gun disqualifies the
action of boarding a plane but it also brings about an indirect effect when the action
of boarding a plane is executed: the passenger being put under arrest. Note that for
this indirect effect to take place, both requirements must be present: the action of
472

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

boarding a plane being executed, and the above qualification constraint is present. In
other words, a qualification constraint might also bring about indirect effects.
We believe that all these problems are too sophisticated for any circumscription policy to successfully address in most situations. Furthermore, such a policy would be
extremely hard to understand and error-prone. Recall the failure of non-monotonic
reasoning formalisms regarding the frame problem (in its simplest form viz. without
the ramification and the qualification problems). Researchers had failed to point out
this bug for several years before Hanks and McDermott discovered it in their award
winning paper (1987).
5. More recently, Thielscher (2001) gives an exposition on the qualification problem.
Thielscher discusses the problem sustained by McCarthys (1986) simplistic circumscription policy, viz. the anomalous models. He then introduces a default logic based
formalisation for the qualification problem in the Fluent Calculus and shows that
his formalisation does not suffer the problem of anomalous models. Note that in
Thielschers formalisation, circumscription is still required to generate the initial theories of the default theories (in addition to the set of default rules). Nevertheless,
Thielschers solution still suffers the following drawbacks: (i) Thielschers use of the
predicate P oss is in the same way as has been formulated by Doherty and Kvarnstrom
(1998). Thus, qualifications are taken over the executability conditions for the actions
rather than over different effects of the actions; and (ii) while Thielscher shows that
the problem of anomalous models sustained by McCarthys (1986) circumscription
policy is overcome in his formalisation, its not entirely clear whether Thielschers
formalisation which is based on both circumscription and default logic will not suffer
from other anomalies.
1.3 The Ramification Problem
In the context of reasoning about action, the ramification problem is mainly related to
indirect effects. Finding a solution to this problem may not be easy as indirect effects
indicate exceptions to frame assumptions and require special treatment. While there have
been several formalisms dealing with the ramification problem, e.g., see (Lin, 1995; McCain
& Turner, 1995; Thielscher, 1997), there are still several issues that need a more careful
consideration. We consider three examples to motivate our discussion.
Example 1 Consider Thielschers (1997) circuit:
This example is interesting because it gives a counterexample for the minimalistic approaches e.g. in the work of McCain and Turner (1995). In this domain, the intended
relationship between relay and sw2 is that when relay is on, it would make sw 2 jump off.
Thus, when sw1 and sw3 are both closed, sw2 can not be also closed as that is prevented
by relay. However, there is certainly a duration (no matter how short it is) before sw 2
is forced to jump off by relay. In the state given in Figure 1, after performing the action
of closing switch sw1 , two next states are equally possible: one in which detect is on, in
another it is off.4 Only the latter is sanctioned in a minimalistic account. Through this
4. The reason for nondeterminism in this case is due to insufficiency of domain information: depending on
the sensitivity of relay, light and detect, when light could get lit quickly and detect is very sensitive to

473

fiVo & Foo

-sw1

sw2
-light

-detect

-relay
sw3

Figure 1: Thielschers circuit
example, Thielscher pointed out the need for keeping track of the chains of applications of
indirect effects.
Thielscher (1997) proposes a way to remedy this problem by keeping track of the applications of the domain constraints which are re-expressed in terms of causal relationships.
Thus, given the above example, his formalism is able to arrive at a next state in which the
detect is on. Following such chains of causal relationships, the dynamic system undergoes
several intermediate states before arriving at the next state.
2
In this paper, we proceed one step further from Thielschers (1997) position by formally
representing the intermediate states as possible states of the world. 5 We believe that an
intelligent agent should be able to reason about these intermediate states even though
they may not satisfy all domain constraints. This capability is especially important if the
reasoner needs to explain certain observations about the world in a systematic way. We
note that given an observation, there may be several chains of causal relationships that
bring about that observation.6 Unless intermediate states are explicitly represented and
reasoned about, there is no way for an agent to have a full insight to the system in hand
and certain information would be missing.
Example 2 Consider Lins (1995) spring-loaded suitcase with two latches. Lets assume
that the latches can be toggled if the suitcase is closed. The following state constraint is
supposed to apply in this domain: up(Latch 1 )  up(Latch2 )  open(Suitcase).
The question is: how does a robot close the above suitcase back after opening it? McCain
and Turner (1997) also consider this problem and their answer is:
detect any glimpse of light and relay is not sensitive enough to make the switch sw2 jump off quickly
enough then detect will be on; otherwise it will stay off.
5. Note that this point of view also corresponds to the traditional definition of states as snapshots of the
world.
6. For example, given detect is not on in the next state, it can be that either the light has never been bright
or the light may have been bright but the detect is not sufficiently sensitive to detect its momentary
brightness.

474

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

In general, when both latches are up, it is impossible to perform only the action
of closing the suitcase; one must also concurrently toggle at least one of the
latches.
(McCain & Turner, 1997, p. 464, italic is original.)
The problem now is how to represent the action of holding the suitcase closed such
that it would overcome the above indirect effect caused by the loaded spring. This also
suggests another kind of actions whose direct effects are to keep the world unchanged.
These actions have usually been formalised by other researchers as fluents, e.g. holding.
Our main objection to this approach is that agents also need to reason about these actions
since they may also require certain preconditions such as the agent is strong enough to
hold the object. Moreover, under certain (abnormal) circumstances, agents may also fail to
perform such actions. That is, these actions are also subject to the qualification problem
discussed in the previous subsection.
2
Example 3 Consider the circuit in Figure 2: 7

-relay1

-sw1
sw2

-relay2
Figure 2: A dynamic domain with a (potentially) infinite sequence of indirect effects
It is quite obvious that after performing the action f lip 1 whose direct effect is having sw1
closed, the following circular sequence of indirect effects will take place: {relay 1 , relay2 } 
sw2  {relay1 , relay2 }  sw2  {relay1 , relay2 }. This sequence of course would
potentially carry on the above sequence of indirect effects indefinitely unless sw 1 is flipped
open or some device stopped functioning correctly, e.g. when the battery is out of charge.
In other words, this action domain requires some action to be inserted in between a series
of on going indirect effects which can not be captured by the above representation. Note
also that none of the causation-based representations proposed by Lin (1995), McCain and
Turner (1995) or Thielscher (1997) is able to deal with the above action domain.
2
1.4 Towards a Solution
To address the problems discussed in the previous sections, we argue that in order to find a
uniform solution to these problems one should avoid cryptic formalisms whose consequences
7. This example is an instance of the so-called vicious cycles scenarios, e.g., see (Shanahan, 1999).

475

fiVo & Foo

can not be seen clearly from the formalisation of the problem domains. As a consequence,
we propose a uniform non-monotonic solution to the main problems of reasoning about action. Essentially, when performing commonsense reasoning, the reasoner relies on a number
of plausible assumptions, e.g., assuming that an instance of birds flies, or assuming that
shooting a turkey with a loaded gun causes it to die, etc. In traditional default reasoning
formalisms such as circumscriptive approaches or default logic, these assumptions are made
implicit. For example, these are the instances of predicates which are minimised away by
circumscription or the implicitly asserted justifications in default rules when they are still
consistent with the extension under consideration in default logic. The proposed representation formalism aims at making these assumptions explicit so that an automated reasoner
is conscious (at least) about what assumptions it relies on when performing reasoning.
Then the reasoner can always manipulate these assumptions independently of each other.
It is also the basic idea of assumption-based frameworks which are at heart of Bondarenko,
Dung, Kowalski, and Tonis (1997) argumentation-theoretic approach.
We then proceed to consider the ramification problems and domain theories with concurrent and non-deterministic events. Among the major results, we show that our framework
captures the essence of the causation-based approaches regarding the ramification problem.
Moreover, we also show the expressiveness of our formalism through two examples in which
indirect effects also need qualifications and infinite sequence of indirect effects. To the best
of our knowledge, none of the existing formalisms are able to cope with these scenarios.
Based on the basic idea of assumption-based frameworks, our approach comprises the
following major aspects of representation:
1. We introduce different types of assumptions to render various laws of common sense
in dynamic domains. For instance, frame assumptions are introduced to capture
the common sense law of inertia whilst (two types of) qualification assumptions are
introduced to overcome the qualification problem.
2. We introduce a special class of (system-generated) dummy actions to allow the explanation problem, i.e. when some actions or events occur outside of the reasoners
knowledge, to be dealt with in a uniform manner.
3. Being based on Bondarenko et al.s (1997) argumentation-theoretic framework, our
approach makes use of the inference rules to represent domain knowledge.
4. Lying at heart of our approach is an argumentation-theoretic semantics, called plausibility semantics, which is argued to best render common sense knowledge in dynamic
domains. This semantics consists in a particular policy of resolving conflicting assumptions when computing the argumentation to be accepted.
To summarise, in this paper we formalise an expressive representation scheme in order
to cope with sophisticated action domains. We believe that such a formalisation sometimes
requires certain advanced knowledge to be encoded in a precise and well-engineered way.
The representation of action theories proposed in this paper can be considered as the intermediate level between commonsense and scientific knowledge. The expressiveness of the
formalism is improved through several independent steps by adding further assumptions
476

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

into the domain descriptions. This also shows one advantage of our solution: a simple representation can be achieved by simply removing the involved assumptions. This is arguably
a desirable feature as the reasoner has the option of either increasing the expressibility of the
representation formalism or improving the simplicity and, as a consequence, the efficiency
of the reasoning system.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section 2 summarises relevant features of
the abstract argumentation framework proposed by Bondarenko et al. (1997), its semantics and concrete instances. In Section 3 we present the syntax and semantics of the basic
temporal logic and the extension for reasoning about action. In Section 4 we present our
formalisation for reasoning about action based on the argumentation-theoretic approach
introduced by Bondarenko et al. (1997). Our approach to reasoning about action, in particular a uniform solution to the frame and the qualification problems, as well as the main
results of the paper are presented in Section 5. In Section 6, we show how the proposed
formalism is extended to deal with more complex dynamic domains, including those with
concurrent and non-deterministic events, and indirect effects. Related work and future
research directions are discussed in Section 7. We will defer most proofs of the results
presented in the paper to the Appendix.
This paper is an extended version of two earlier conference papers (Vo & Foo, 2001,
2002). The main differences are that in this version all proofs are included, lemmas that are
used in the proofs of the theorems are introduced to help the reader more easily comprehend
these results, and the presentation has been improved and extended with more examples of
the various constructions.

2. Defeasible Reasoning by Argumentation
Let a deductive system hL, Ri be given, where L is some formal language with countably
many sentences and R is a set of inference rules. Given a theory   L and a sentence
  L, we write  `hL,Ri  if there is a deduction from  whose last element is . T h hL,Ri ()
denotes the set {  L |  `hL,Ri }. Since the language L is generally kept fixed whereas
the set of inference rules R is likely to vary depending on the description of the domain,
when there is no possible confusion we will abbreviate ` hL,Ri and T hhL,Ri as `R and T hR ,
respectively. Thus the classical inference relation ` can also be written as ` RC where RC is
the set of inference rules of classical propositional logic. Note also that every set of inference
rules considered in this paper will be a super set of R C .
Given a deductive system hL, Ri, an assumption-based framework with respect to hL, Ri
consists of a theory  representing the current knowledge of the reasoner about the domain,
an assumption base AB and a contrariness operator  , i.e. given an assumption   AB, 
denotes the contrary of .
Remark: The notion of the contrary of an assumption is intended to generalise the classical
negation . Note that in general assumptions may be constructed by special operators
(e.g. negation-as-failure in the case of logic programming, or the modal operator L in the
case of autoepistemic logic, Moore, 1985), thus the contrariness operator must also be sufficiently general.

477

fiVo & Foo

The hardest part in reasoning with assumption-based frameworks is computing the set
of assumptions to augment the given theory . In an argumentation-theoretic approach,
this is realised by the attack relation. To determine which assumptions to be accepted,
assumptions are put together to form arguments. The assumptions behind the best arguments are considered to be acceptable. Several semantics for best arguments are presented
by Bondarenko et al. (1997) based on the notions of attack: Given an assumption-based
framework h, AB, i and an assumption set   AB:
  attacks an assumption   AB iff   T h(  ).
  attacks an assumption set 0  AB iff  attacks some assumption    0 .
  is closed iff  = AB  T h(  ).
  is conflict-free iff there does not exist any   AB such that    ` R , .
Assumption-based frameworks in which assumption sets are always closed are referred
to as flat. In a flat assumption-based framework, the conflict-free property of a set of
assumptions  is equivalent to the property that  does not attack itself. The major
argumentation-theoretic semantics defined by Bondarenko et al. (1997) for assumptionbased frameworks include:
 Stability semantics: an assumption set   AB is stable iff
1.  is closed,
2.  does not attack itself, and
3.  attacks each assumption  
/ .
Bondarenko et al. (1997) show that the above stability semantics corresponds to the
standard semantics of extensions of Theorist (Poole, 1988), minimal models of (many
cases of) circumscription (McCarthy, 1980, 1986), extensions of Default Logic (Reiter,
1980), stable expansions of Autoepistemic Logic (Moore, 1985), and stable models of
logic programming. In other words, from a complexity-theoretic perspective, any
approach based on the existing formalisms to default reasoning can be rendered in a
corresponding assumption-based argumentation framework with no loss in terms of
computational complexity.
 Admissibility and Preferability semantics: Bondarenko et al. (1997) go further to
extend these existing formalisms by generalising the semantics of admissible and preferred arguments which were originally proposed for logic programming only. The
new semantics are defined in terms of admissible and preferred sets of assumptions/extensions. An assumption set   AB is admissible iff
1.  is closed,
2.  does not attack itself, and
3. for all closed sets of assumptions  0  AB if 0 attacks  then  attacks 0 .
Maximal (with respect to set inclusion) admissible assumption sets are called preferred.
478

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

Throughout this paper assumptions are expressed in terms of usual propositions. Thus,
we will replace the notion of contrariness  in Bondarenko et al.s (1997) system with the
classical negation  and omit it from the specification of assumption-based frameworks.
That is, an assumption-based framework h, ABi consists of a theory   L, and the
assumption base AB which contains the assumptions to be used in the reasoning.

3. Domain Descriptions
We introduce a propositional action description language based on a more comprehensive
representation formalism proposed by Sandewall (1994). In particular, we extend Drakengren and Bja relands (1999) language so that it is possible to describe narratives in our
framework.
3.1 Syntax
Following Sandewall (1994), the underlying representation of time is a (discrete) time structure T = hT, <, +, i consisting of
 a time domain T whose members are called time points which are integers in this
paper (except in a later part of the paper where the distinction will be made explicit);
 <, +,  are as usual for integers.
Given a time structure T = hT, <, +, i, a signature  with respect to T is a tuple
= hT , F, Ai, where T is a set of countably infinitely many time-point variables, F is a set
of propositional fluent names, and A is a set of action names. Since the time structure T is
fixed in the rest of this paper, T will be taken implicitly whenever a signature is introduced.
We assume that all sets in  are countable. We denote F  = {[]f | f  F}.8 A member
of F  is a fluent literal. Moreover, A = A0  DA, where A0 is the set of domain dependent
action names, called basic actions, e.g. load, shoot, etc. and DA = {da l | l  F  } is the set
of dummy actions. As will be explained later in this paper, our solution to the problems
of reasoning about action is based on the basic guideline of attributing changes to events.
Given the reasoners ignorance about certain events that bring about changes in the world,
the dummy actions are to be used to make up for these gaps in the reasoners belief state.
That is why we need to associate the dummy actions with the fluent literals from F  .
For each fluent literal l  F  , we introduce the following two symbols: AQ l , and F Al :
 AQl is associated with the assumed qualifications upon the preconditions of an action
regarding the fluent literal l. Essentially, AQ l when used in the description of the
dynamics of an action  allows the reasoner to describe only the main preconditions
of  (with regards to the fluent literal l) while leaving other possible (but less probable)
qualifications to be rendered by a single assumption AQ l .
 F Al is associated with the frame assumptions regarding l. F A l , when coupled with
a particular frame inference rule, allows the reasoner to infer that the fluent literal l
continues to hold in future time points unless there is a reason that defeats F A l .
8. The notation [] means that the formula following it may, or may not, be negated.

479

fiVo & Foo

def

def

Given a set of fluent literals   F  , we denote F A = {F Al | l  } and AQ =
{AQl | l  }.
A time-point expression is one of the following:
 a member of T,
 a time-point variable in T ,

 an expression formed from time-point expressions using + and . For convenience,
we will also write  + and   instead of  + 1 and   1, respectively.
We denote the set of time-point expressions by T E.
Definition 3.1 Let a signature  = hT , F, Ai be given and ,   T E, f  F,   A,
R  {=, <},   {, , , }. Define the basic (domain description) language  over 
by:
0 ::= true | false | f |  R | 0 | 0  0 | [ ]0 ,
 ::= 0 | [, ] |  |   
and the assumption base AB by:
AB = ABAQ  ABF A , where
ABAQ = {[, ]AQl | ,   T E and l  F  }, and
ABF A = {[ ]F Al |   T E and l  F  }.
The domain description language LD (over ) is defined: LD =   AB.9
[, ] means the action  has a duration corresponding to the interval [, ]. [, ]AQ l
means the fluent literal l is assumed to be qualified to hold by the end of the interval [, ].
[ ]F Al means the fluent literal l is assumed by default to persist from the time point 
to the next, i.e. the principle of inertia. Notice the difference between [ ]F A l1 and [ ]l2
for some fluent literals l1 , l2  F  . [ ]l2 indicates that the fluent literal l2 holds at  while
[ ]F Al1 indicates that the fact that the fluent literal l 1 persists during the interval [,  + ]
is true.
For example, in the blocks world domain, to say that block A is on block B at the time
point 2, we write: [2]on(A, B); or, to say that an action pickup the block A occurs between
time points t1 + 3 and t2  1 and that the relation < holds between t 1 + 5 and t2 , we write
[t1 + 3, t2  1]pickup(A)  (t1 + 5 < t2 ).
A formula that does not contain any connectives (i.e. , , , , , and [.]) is atomic.
If  is atomic and   T E, then the formulas , [ ], , [ ], and [ ] are literals.
Let  be a formula. A fluent f  F occurs free in  iff it does not occur within the
scope of a [ ] expression in .   T E binds f in  if a formula [ ] occurs as a subformula
of , and f is free in . If no fluent occurs free in ,  is closed. If  does not contain any
occurrence of [ ] for any   T E, then  is propositional.
9. It would be more precise to denote the domain description language over  by L . However, as the
signature is usually clear from the context and in order to avoid the mention of  every time we have to
formalise something with the domain description language, we choose to denote it by LD .

480

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

3.2 Semantics
Definition 3.2 Let  = hT , F, Ai be a signature. A state over  is a function from F to
the set {true, false} of truth values. A history over  is a function h from T to the set of
states. A valuation is a function  from T E to T. A narrative assignment is a function  from
TAT to the set {true, false}. In addition, we define  q : TAQF  T  {true, false}
and f : TFAF   {true, false}. An interpretation over  is a tuple hh, , ,  q , f i where
h is a history,  is a valuation,  is a narrative assignment and  q , f are defined as above.
Example 4 Consider Hanks and McDermotts (1987) Yale Shooting Problem (YSP) :
There are three possible actions: load (the gun), wait, and shoot (the victim with the
gun). Normally, waiting does not cause any change in the world, but shooting leads to the
victims death, provided that, of course, the gun is loaded. Assume that all three actions
are performed, in the given order.
We define the signature ysp to be a tuple h{t, t1 , t2 , . . . , u, u1 , u2 , . . .}, {loaded, alive}, {load,
wait, shoot}i. Then the Yale Shooting problem can be formulated in the domain description
language Lysp as the following theory: ysp,0 = {[0]alive, [0, 1]load, [1, 2]wait, [2, 3]shoot}.
The following two histories h1 and h2 are corresponding to the well-known models in
the literature of reasoning about action: h 1 to the intended model and h2 to the anomalous
model most frameworks would produce.

h1

h2

A

A

A

A

L

L

L

L

0

1

2

3

A

A

A

A

L

L

L

L

0

1

2

3

Figure 3: The two histories for the YSP action description.
Each oval in Figure 3 represents a state over  ysp . A narrative assignment complying
with the above action description would map the three tuples (0, load, 1), (1, wait, 2), and
(2, shoot, 3) to true and other tuples to false (relative to the assumption that normally,
given any action and any time point, there is no instance of that action at that time point
unless specified otherwise ).
Definition 3.3 Let ,    and I = hh, , ,  q , f i an interpretation. Assume ,   T E,
f  F, A  A, R  {=, <}, l  F  ,   {, , , }, and   {true, false}. Define the
truth value of  in I for a time point t  T, denoted I(, t) as follows:

481

fiVo & Foo

I(, t) = 
I([, ]A, t) = (( ), A, ())
I([ ]F Al , t) = f (( ), F Al )
I(, t) = I(, t)
I([ ], t) = I(, ( ))

I(f, t) = h(t)(f )
I([, ]AQ l , t) = q (( ), AQl , ())
I( R, t) = ( )R()
I(  , t) = I(, t)  I(, t)

Two formulas  and  are equivalent iff I(, t) = I(, t) for all I and t. An interpretation
I is a model of a set    of formulas, denoted I |= , iff I(, t) = true for every t  T
and   . A formula    is entailed by a set    of formulas, denoted  |= , iff  is
true in all models of .
Definition 3.4 Let I = hh, , , q , f i be an interpretation.
1. The set OccI = {(t, A, u)  T  A  T | (t, A, u) = true} is called action occurrence
denotation of I.
2. The set F AI = {(t, F Al )  T  FAF  | f (t, F Al ) = true} is called F A-denotation of
I.
3. The set AQI = {(t, AQl , u)  T  AQF   T | q (t, AQl , u) = true} is called AQdenotation of I.

4. Representing Dynamic Domains in the Argumentation-Theoretic
Approach
We now proceed to showing an assumption-based framework for representing dynamic domains. We subsequently introduce a uniform framework for solving the frame and the
qualification problems based on the argumentation-theoretic approach. General solutions
for the frame and the qualification problems can be obtained by computing plausible sets
of assumptions which guarantee that extensions computed from these sets of assumptions
will be consistent when the given theory is consistent. We now introduce some additional
notations: Given an inference rule r  R, we denote by prem(r) and cons(r) the premise
and the consequence of rule r, respectively.
Definition
S 4.1 A deductive system hL D , Ri is well-defined iff for each subset S  R, if
the set rS prem(r) is consistent then the set CON S(S) = {cons(r) | r  S} is also
consistent.
Henceforth, we will assume that deductive systems are well-defined. Being formalised
in terms of the argumentation-theoretic approach, the representation requires an extended
notion of consistency.
Definition 4.2 Let hLD , Ri be a deductive system,
(i) a set of sentences   LD is R-consistent iff  6`R false;
(ii) an assumption-based framework h, ABi with respect to hL D , Ri is consistent iff  is
R-consistent.
482

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

Remark: Observe that even when hLD , Ri is a well-defined deductive system, consistency
b
is not equivalent to R-consistency. For instance, let R = { }, the (logically) consistent
a
theory  = {a, b} is not R-consistent.
Example 4 (continued) Returning to the Yale Shooting problem, the following inference
rules describe the actions of this domain:
[, ]load
[]loaded  [ ]F Aloaded

(5)

[, ]shoot, [ ]loaded
[]alive  [ ]F Aalive

(6)

[ ]loaded, [ ]F Aloaded
[ + ]loaded

(7)

[ ]alive, [ ]F Aalive
[ + ]alive

(8)

[ ]loaded, [ ]F Aloaded
[ + ]loaded

(9)

[ ]alive, [ ]F Aalive
[ + ]alive

(10)

Rules (5) and (6) represent the descriptions of the actions load and shoot, respectively.
Action wait does not cause any effect to the world, so there is no need to describe it. Other
rules render the common sense law of inertia: at any time point, a fluent literal presumably
persists to the next time point.
Most argumentation-theoretic semantics, e.g. stability, admissibility, preferability, complete, well-founded semantics, etc. (Bondarenko et al., 1997) are based on the notion of
attack. However, to reason about problem domains with incomplete information, especially
action domains, this notion alone may not be sufficient as we may not always be able to
construct explicit arguments to defeat unsound assumptions. For example, consider the
Yale Shooting Problem: By observing that a turkey is shot with a loaded gun at time point
1, the reasoner infers plausibly that the turkey is dead at time point 2 using the assumption
that the action shoot is qualified to bring about the effect of killing the victim. However,
at time point 2, the reasoner could observe that the turkey is still alive. Existing solutions
to the frame problem, e.g. Reiters (1991), Thielschers (1997), Castilho et al.s (1999), etc.
fail to deal with such a surprise since they allow a contradiction to be derived. Observe that
the reasoner does not have any explicit reason to defeat the above qualification assumption,
i.e. she is not aware of any cause that prevents the application of this qualification assumption. She only knows that it is not acceptable in this case by common sense. To formalise
such phenomena, we introduce the notion of rejected assumptions.
483

fiVo & Foo

Definition 4.3 Given an assumption-based framework h, ABi, a set of assumptions  
AB rejects an assumption   AB iff
(a)  is conflict-free, and
(b)   {} attacks itself.
For instance, in example 4, the set of assumptions  1 = {[0]F Aalive , [1]F Aalive , [1]F Aloaded }
attacks the assumption [2]F Aalive .10 Moreover, relative to the given action description, any
set of assumptions attacks the assumption [0]F A loaded . On the other hand, the set of assumptions 2 = {[0]F Aalive , [1]F Aalive , [2]F Aalive } rejects the assumption [1]F Aloaded but
2 does not attack it.
Observation 1 Given an assumption-based framework h, ABi and a conflict-free set of
assumptions   AB, if  attacks an assumption  
/  then  rejects .
Then, why do we not generalise the contrariness notion of an assumption so that it
would be general enough to account for all rejected assumptions? The reason is because we
want to isolate the set of assumptions that are rejected but are not attacked as part of our
solution to the frame problem.
Definition 4.4 Given an assumption-based framework h, ABi, a set of assumptions  
AB leniently rejects an assumption   AB iff
(a)  rejects , and
(b)  does not attack .
def

We denote Lr() = {  AB |  is leniently rejected by }.
To show that our solution provides an intuitive account for problems of reasoning about
action, several scenarios should be considered. These include the projection problem, the
most basic form of the frame problem, whose typical example is the infamous YSP. Another
scenario concerns with the explanation problem which are usually discussed with the Stolen
Car Problem (Kautz, 1986) and the Stanford Murder Mystery (Baker, 1989). We will first
provide an informal discussion of our approach through these examples.
In the present solution, the frame assumptions are the essence of the principle of inertia,and their role in the argumentation approach is illustrated below by the Yale Shooting
Problem. In this formulation we intentionally ignore the qualification problem (it is addressed in the next section) to highlight how the frame problem is solved. We now reconsider the well-worn example YSP to motivate our approach to the frame problem.
Example 4 (continued) Given the theory  ysp , the argumentation-theoretic approach will
yield the following preferred set of assumptions (Bondarenko et al., 1997):
{[t]F Al | t  T and l  {loaded, alive, loaded, alive}} \ {[0]F A loaded , [2]F Aalive },
which corresponds to the intended model of this scenario in which the gun remains loaded
at time point 2 and the victim is not alive at time point 3.
This extension is also the stable extension and well-founded semantics (Bondarenko
et al., 1997) of the given theory under the argumentation-theoretic approach. Note that in
10. In fact, any set of assumptions containing the assumption [1]F Aloaded would attack [2]F Aalive .

484

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

case one would like to be uncertain about whether the gun is still loaded after the shooting
action, one just simply needs to add an axiom: [, ]shoot  [ ]F A loaded to dictate that
the persistence of the fluent loaded after the action shooting is not guaranteed. In that
case, we can still derive that [ ]loaded for  = 1, 2, but we can no longer give a definite
assertion about [ ]loaded for   3.
As the above formalisation of YSP resembles that using default logic, it may be surprising that the problem of unintended models pointed out by Hanks and McDermott
(1987) for circumscription, default logic, autoepistemic logic does not happen here. The
principal reason is the interaction of the inference rules and the notion of attack in the
argumentation-theoretic framework, which invalidates undesired assumptions. Notice that
even if [2]loaded can be (magically) derived, it cannot lead to [1]F A loaded . Therefore, the
set of assumptions corresponding to this case does not satisfy the conditions of preferred
set of assumptions, thus ruling out this unintended model. This shows one of the important
features of assumption-based frameworks on its capability of making explicit the assumptions used by the reasoner during the course of inference. Recall that defaults justifications
are accepted as long as they are consistent with some extension for credulous semantics
or all extensions for skeptical semantics (thus the name consistency-based approach.) In
light of the inertia principle, its considered to be abnormal if a fluent does not persist
from a state to the next state. To minimise the abnormality, (normal) default rules are
introduced to express the fact that if its consistent to believe that there is no abnormality
with respect to a fluent f and an action a in a situation s then assert that. But then we
would fail to distinguish between the abnormalities brought about by reasonable causes and
those unintuitively generated to make them consistent with some possible extension. The
latter is of course corresponding to the anomalous models. By using explicit assumptions,
not only consistency is maintained (by preventing the accepted assumptions from attacking
themselves) but each rejection of assumptions must also be justified by the known facts
from the given theory.
Discussion:
1. Turner (1997) showed that an alternative representation of the YSP in default logic
can help solve the issue of anomalous models introduced by Hanks and McDermotts
(1987) representation. Turner formulates the Yale Shooting scenario as follows:
Holds(Alive, S0 )
False

(11)

True
Holds(Loaded, Result(Load, s))

(12)

Holds(Loaded, s)
Holds(Alive, Result(Shoot, s))

(13)

: Holds(f, S0 )
Holds(f, S0 )

(14)

485

fiVo & Foo

: Holds(f, S0 )
Holds(f, S0 )

(15)

Holds(f, s) : Holds(f, Result(a, s))
Holds(f, Result(a, s))

(16)

Holds(f, s) : Holds(f, Result(a, s))
Holds(f, Result(a, s))

(17)

Notice that Turner also uses the inference rules to block the backward reasoning
that generates the anomalous models of the Yale Shooting scenario. However, this also
means that all kinds of useful backward reasoning will also be blocked. In other words,
Turners formulation fails to deal with surprising observations about states at later
time points. As a consequence, Turners formulation only works when the domain is
restricted to qualification-free. As soon as the action descriptions, e.g. the one for
the shoot action in YSP, need to rely on some default justifications, e.g. qualification
assumptions, Turners formulation would also encounter the problem of undesirable
extensions. Our approach offers solutions to both of the above issues.
2. After Hanks and McDermotts (1987) seminal paper in which early approaches to
the frame problems were exposed, besides new attempts to solve the frame problem,
Sandewall (1994) should be accredited as the first who tried to approach the problems of reasoning about action in a systematic way. As part of this effort, he also
examines the reason behind the failure of early approaches to the frame problem. As
discussed by Sandewall, early approaches to reasoning about action while attempting
to formulate the inertia principle have made the common mistake of making changes
the abnormality regarding this principle but failing to distinguish between normal
changes triggered by actions and anomalous changes. This important insight turns
out to be a consequence of a much more general law for reasoning about dynamic
domains discovered by researchers in the community in pursuit of solutions to various
problems of reasoning about actions: action dynamics are causality-based. It is this
principle that underpins most solutions to the problems of reasoning about action.
The anomalous models that arise in early approaches to the frame problem discovered by Hanks and McDermott (1987) or to the qualification problem as discussed
by Thielscher (2001) are those in which the causes of abnormalities are not present.
On the other hand, regarding the ramification problem, given a domain constraint
involving a number of fluents, its important to know which of these fluents are the
causes influencing the other fluents, i.e. the causality direction between the involved
fluents.
In light of the above analysis, Turners (1997) approach appears to be rather ad hoc.
Note that Turners solution to the problem of anomalous models is to block backward reasoning by the use of inference rules without any motivation on why backward
reasoning is a bad thing. While his approach appears to share with solutions based
on chronological ignorance (which will be discussed in more details in Section 7) the
486

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

notion of directedness: By minimizing chronologically or blocking backward reasoning, one tends to minimize causes rather than effects. However, a more systematic
approach to various problems of reasoning about action is still very much desired.
Nevertheless, while the preferability semantics copes successfully with the YSP, it can
not properly account for the explanation problem, e.g. the Stanford Murder Mystery (Baker,
1989), the Stolen Car Problem (Kautz, 1986). The subtlety lies in the derivation of the
contrary of the frame assumptions. The contrary of a frame assumption is derived only
when both the occurrence of the event that brings about the change (absent in the Stolen
Car Problem) and the preconditions required to be satisfied for the change to actually take
place (absent in the Stanford Murder Mystery) are explicitly derivable. This is where the
notion of (leniently) rejected assumptions is called into service.
Definition 4.5 Given an assumption-based framework F A =h, ABi, a set of assumptions
  AB is presumable wrt F A iff
(a)  = {  AB |    `R } (in the terms given in Bondarenko et al., 1997,  is
closed),
(b)  does not attack itself, and
(c) for each assumption  6 ,  is rejected by .
Definition 4.6 Given an assumption-based framework F A =h, ABi, a set of assumptions
  AB is plausible wrt F A iff
(a)  is presumable, and
(b) there exists no 0  AB such that 0 is presumable and Lr(0 )  Lr().
We now proceed to formalising action theories in our framework.
Definition 4.7 Let  = hT , F, Ai be a signature. Assume ,   T E,   A,   , and
l  F  . A domain description D (over ) is a tuple hL D , R, AB, i, where:
1. LD is the domain description language and AB is an assumption base over ;
2. R = RC  RF  RA  RQ , where
(a) RC is the set of inference rules of (classical) propositional logic;
[ ]l, [ ]F Al
(b) RF is the set of frame-based inference rules of the form:
, i.e. those
[ + ]l
that represent the frame axioms in terms of inference rules;
, [, ], [, ]AQl
,
(c) RA is the set of action descriptions which are inference rules of the form:
[]l  [ ]F Al
i.e. those that represent the conditions for the action  to bring about l; and

(d) RQ is the set of qualification-based inference rules of the form:
, i.e.
[, ]AQl
those that represent the qualifications regarding the fluent literal l.
3. The theory   .
Given a set of assumptions , we denote  F A =   ABF A and AQ =   ABAQ .
Observation 2 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be a domain description, for each set of assumptions   AB, either  is closed or  attacks itself.
487

fiVo & Foo

5. Reasoning about Action: The Frame and the Qualification Problems
In general, we adopt the following guidelines in seeking a uniform solution to the problems
of reasoning about action:
 The derived pieces of information do not conflict with the given facts;
 Occurrences of events are minimised; and
 The inertia of fluents is maximised though the minimality of the event occurrences
will be of higher priority.
Aside from the trivial case of occurrences of actions causing the frame assumptions to
be rejected, two aspects of actions can be distinguished:
1. An action happens but the change it is supposed to cause does not take place. We
call this expectation failure and this is more or less the qualification problem; and
2. No actions that are known to have happened and caused a change but the change
did take place. We call this surprise and this is usually known as the explanation
problem.
The following assumption represents our underlying intuition behind reasoning about
action formalisms.
Assumption 1 Intuitive models contain minimal (with respect to set inclusion) sets of
surprises.
Now we introduce some model-theoretic counterpart notions of the assumption-based
notions presented above.
Definition 5.1 Let  = hT , F, Ai be a signature and D = hL D , R, AB, i a domain description over . An interpretation I = hh, , ,  q , f i is a model of D iff
1. I is a model of ;
2. for each r  R, if I |= prem(r) then I |= cons(r).
The following definition captures one of several aspects of the (model-theoretic) solution
of the frame problem. This aspect is known as the action-oriented frame problem in Lin
and Shohams (1995) terms. The proposed minimisation policy formalises the intuition that
change does not happen by itself but is caused by some kind of event. Thus, for each fluent,
if its value is changed between two timepoints  and , (at least) an occurrence of some
event must end at  that brings about that change.
Definition 5.2 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be a domain description and I a model of D. I is
a coherent model of D iff
1. for each basic action   A0 and ,   T E, if I |= [, ] then  |= [, ] ; and
488

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

2. for each l  F  and t  T, if I |= [t]l  [t+ ]l then either
(a) there are   A0 and s  T such that r =
I |= prem(r)[1 /s, 2 /t+ ],11 or
(b) I |= [t, t+ ]dal

, [1 , 2 ], [1 , 2 ]AQl
 R and
[2 ]l  [1 ]F Al

Thus, in a coherent model: (i) all satisfiable basic actions must follow from the given
theory, and (ii) all changes are attributable to events of one kind or another.
Given an interpretation I, we want to extract the sets of assumptions satisfiable in I.
Definition 5.3 Let  = hT , F, Ai be a signature and I an interpretation over . The set
of frame assumptions satisfiable in I, denoted  IF A , is defined as follows:
IF A = {[t]F Al | (t, F Al )  F AI }
and the set of qualification assumptions satisfiable in I, denoted  IAQ , is :
IAQ = {[t1 , t2 ]AQl | (t1 , AQl , t2 )  AQI }
We also write IQF = IAQ  IF A .
Conversely, given a theory  and a set of assumptions , a reasoner can also construct
his models about the domain of interest.
Definition 5.4 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be a domain description and   AB. A model
I = hh, , , q , f i of D is -relativised iff
1. for each   AB, I |=  iff   ; and
2. OccI = OAD  DAS(), where:
(a) OAD = {((1 ), , (2 ))  T  A0  T | |= [1 , 2 ]}, and
(b) DAS() = {(t, dal , t+ )  T  DA  T | []FAl 
/  and there do not exist any
action
, [1 , 2 ], [1 , 2 ]AQl
 R and I |=
  A0 and s  T such that r =
[2 ]l  [1 ]F Al
prem(r)[1 /s, 2 /t+ ]}.
-relativised models are one of the central notions of our framework. Essentially, assumptions underpin our machinery to conjecture information based on common sense knowledge. As such, we will try to accept as many assumption as possible unless there is a good
reason not to. Therefore, given a set of assumptions, we will attribute every missing frame
assumption to a possible change in the domain the agent is reasoning about which is caused
by either a known action/event or some unknown action, called dummy actions in this
paper.
The following observation is immediate from condition (1.) in the above definition.
Observation 3 Let a domain description D = hL D , R, AB, i and a set of assumptions
  AB be given. If the model I of D is -relativised then  IQF = I(, t) for every t  T.
11. The notation [v1 /t1 , . . . , vn /tn ] is standard in logic and meant to be the instantiation of the formula 
with the variables v1 , . . . , vn being replaced by the terms t1 , . . . , tn , respectively.

489

fiVo & Foo

5.1 The Frame Problem
First we will address the frame problem in a simple setting viz. without qualification
assumptions, but we will lift the restrictions later.
Definition 5.5 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be a domain description. D is a simple domain
description, or S-domain, iff RQ =  and AQ does not occur anywhere in R or .
Definition 5.6 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i a domain description. An interpretation I =
hh, , , q , f i is a simple model, or S-model, of D iff
1. I is a model of D; and
2. q (t, AQl , u) = true for every (t, AQl , u)  T  AQF   T.
This effectively isolates the frame problem from the qualification problem. Note also
that if I is an S-model then IAQ = ABAQ . A coherent S-model is an S-model which is
coherent.
Example 4 (continued.) The following is part of one of the coherent models of D ysp :
{[0, 1]load, [0]loaded, [1]loaded, [0]alive, [1]alive,
[1, 2]wait, [1, 2]daloaded , [2]loaded, [2]alive,
[2, 3]shoot, [3]loaded, [3]alive},
which corresponds to one of the anomalous models of this scenario (the one pointed out by
Hanks and McDermott).
But it is not desirable to admit the occurrence of an event when there is no evidence
for it. Thus we need to minimise the set of action occurrences in a given action theory.
Definition 5.7 Let D be an S-domain. A coherent S-model I of D is a prioritised minimal
model (or simply PMM) of D iff there does not exist any coherent S-model I 0 of D such
0
that OccI  OccI .
Note that the above model-theoretic minimisation policy is not based on the frame
assumptions. This solution to the frame problem is thus amenable to well-known techniques
such as circumscription12 , but we believe an argumentation-theoretic approach is not only
more direct but also has wider applicability. In order to provide the connection between
the above (model-theoretic) minimisation policy and the (argumentation-theoretic) notion
of plausible sets of assumptions we need to maximise the set of assumptions satisfiable in a
PMM.
Definition 5.8 Let D be an S-domain. A PMM I of D is a canonical prioritised minimal
model (or simply CPMM) of D iff there does not exist any PMM I 0 of D such that
0
F AI  F A I .
We now want to see how the account of plausible sets of assumptions connects to this
account of minimality.
12. in combination with the introduction of occurrences of dummy actions.

490

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

Lemma 1 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be an S-domain. If I is a CPMM of D then for each
assumption   AB:  
/ IQF iff  is rejected by IQF .
Proof. () Suppose by way of contradiction that  is not rejected by  IQF , then IQF {} is
R-consistent, i.e.  IQF  {} 6`R false. Since D is an S-domain, AB AQ  IQF . Assume
that  = [ ]F Al for some   T E and l  F  , we can construct an interpretation I 0 in such a
0
way that I 0 interprets everything except F A the same as I and F A I = F AI {(( ), F Al )}.
Since I is a PMM of D, from the above construction, I 0 is also a PMM of D. But
0
F AI  F AI . Contradiction.
() Obvious.

2

Lemma 2 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be an S-domain and I a CPMM of D. If there are
t  T and l  F  such that [t]F Al  Lr(IQF ) then I |= [t, t+ ]dal .
Proof. Let  denote the assumption [t]F A l . First we observe that   Lr(IQF ) implies
 6 IQF since  is rejected by IQF and IQF does not attack itself. This in turn implies
that I |= {[t]l, [t+ ]l} as the denotation of F A in I is required to be maximal since I is a
CPMM of D. From the condition that I is coherent, either (i) there are   A 0 and s  T
such that
, [1 , 2 ], [1 , 2 ]AQl
R
r=
[2 ]l  [1 ]F Al
and I |= prem(r)[1 /s, 2 /t+ ], or (ii) I |= [t, t+ ]dal . Condition (i) guarantees that  is
attacked by IQF and thus  can not be a member of Lr(IQF ). Therefore, (ii) must be the
case.
2
The converse of Lemma 2 does not hold. There are cases in which I |= [t, t + ]dal and
the assumption [t]F Al is attacked by IQF as a basic action occurs that changes the fluent
literal l.
Theorem 1 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be an S-domain. If I is a CPMM of D then  IQF is
plausible.
We now prove that not only can we derive a plausible set of assumptions from a given
CPMM but we can also construct CPMMs from a plausible set of assumptions of a given
S-domain.
The set of -relativised models of an S-domain D is denoted as M od S (D).
Observation 4 Let D be an S-domain and  a set of assumptions of D. For each I 
M odS (D),  = IQF .
Proof. From the construction of -relativised models:
For each I  M odS (D),  = [ ]F Al   iff I |= [ ]F Al iff   IF A . (More precisely,
we have the assumption [( )]F Al is in IF A , where  is the valuation defined in I. But
relative to I, it is identical to .)
2
Therefore,  = IQF .
491

fiVo & Foo

Theorem 2 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be an S-domain and   AB.  is plausible wrt D
iff M odS (D) 6=  and for each I  M odS (D), I is a CPMM of D.
Theorem 3 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be an S-domain. Furthermore, suppose that CP M M (D)
is the set of CPMMsSof D and P laus(D) is the set of plausible sets of assumptions of D,
then CP M M (D) = P laus(D) M odS (D).
5.1.1 Discussion:
So, how does our account of the frame problem relate to the existing approaches to the frame
problem? While there has been a long line of development behind monotonic approaches
to the frame problem starting with Haass (1987) and Schuberts (1990) early attempts and
resulting in Reiters (1991) monotonic solution to the frame problem together with other
solutions proposed by others such as Castilho et al. (1999) and Zhang and Foo (2002) or
Thielschers (1999) Fluent Calculus-based monotonic solution to the frame problem, with
the notable exception of Thielschers (2001) attempt to address the qualification problem,
few have tried to tackle the qualification within the framework they use to address the frame
problem.
On the other hand, in the action languages (Gelfond & Lifschitz, 1998) and related
approaches such as those proposed by McCain and Turner (1995, 1997), Giunchiglia, Kartha,
and Lifschitz (1997), and Giunchiglia and Lifschitz (1998), state transition systems are
employed as the underlying computation machinery which essentially provides the reasoner
with all possible complete states of the world. Furthermore, as domain decsriptions can
be uniquely translated to state transition systems, the reasoner could safely derive the
successor state(s) based on the current together with the transition function.
5.2 Solving the Qualification Problem (in the Presence of the Frame Problem)
The results reported in the previous section are established in a simple setting. If we add
the following observation to the theory in example 4: [3]alive, i.e. after the shoot action,
the victim is still alive, then like most existing formalisms, the above account of plausibility
would come up with a contradiction. In fact, it would be more reasonable that such a
failure is explained as an occurrence of some qualification. In this section, we remove certain
restrictions on the qualifications of actions in order to achieve a more general framework.
There are some subtleties in the way action theories are represented in our proposed
assumption-based framework. Note first that there is a potential difficulty if frame assumptions and qualification assumptions are treated equally, which can be illustrated by a version
of the YSP. Consider the following action description:
{

[ ]alive, [ ]F Aalive [ ]loaded, [, ]shoot, [, ]AQalive
,
}  R,
[ + ]alive
[]alive  [ ]F Aalive

{[0]loaded, [0]alive, [0, 1]shoot}  .
From this, we have (at least) two stable sets of assumptions: one contains the frame
assumption [0]F Aalive which rejects the qualification assumption [0, 1]AQ alive and another
contains [0, 1]AQalive which attacks [0]F Aalive . Only the latter is intuitive in this case but
we do not have any explicit criterion to prefer one over another. The following assumption
492

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

asserts that in our solution to the frame problem in the presence of the qualification problem,
an action is presumed to bring about its effects unless there is an explicit justification for
its disqualification.
Assumption 2 When there is a direct conflict between a frame assumption and a qualification assumption (over a fluent literal), the qualification assumption takes precedence.
Given the presence of several kinds of assumptions, i.e. frame and qualification, we
will adopt the following convention: we will write Lr P () instead of (Lr())P for P 
{F A, AQ}. Since we no longer exclude qualification assumptions from our assumptionbased domain descriptions, we will simply refer to assumption-based domain descriptions
as Q-domains.
Definition 5.9 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be a Q-domain. A presumable set of assumptions
  AB is semi-Q-plausible wrt D iff Lr F A () is minimal (with respect to set inclusion).
Definition 5.10 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be a Q-domain. A set of assumptions   AB
is Q-plausible wrt D iff
1.  is semi-Q-plausible wrt D,
2. AQ is maximal, i.e. there does not exist any  0  AB such that 0 is semi-Qplausible (wrt D) and AQ  0AQ , and
3. F A is maximal relative to the above two conditions, i.e. there does not exist any
0  AB such that 0 satisfies the above two conditions and  F A  0F A .
We will now refer to models of a Q-domain as Q-models. A coherent Q-model is a Qmodel which is coherent. We minimise the set of action occurrences in coherent Q-models
of a given action theory.
Definition 5.11 Let D be a Q-domain. A coherent Q-model I of D is a prioritised minimal
Q-model (or simply PMQM) of D iff there does not exist any coherent Q-model I 0 of D
0
such that OccI  OccI .
Definition 5.12 Let D be an S-domain. A PMQM I of D is a canonical prioritised minimal
Q-model (or simply CPMQM) of D iff
0

1. there does not exist any PMQM I 0 of D such that AQI  AQI , and
0

2. there does not exist any PMM I 0 of D such that F AI  F AI .
Now we can proceed to obtaining the main results for CPMQMs regarding Q-plausible
sets of assumptions which are similar to those for CPMMs regarding plausible sets of assumptions. The following lemma, which is a straightforward extension of Lemma 1 and
Lemma 2 proved in the previous section, is introduced to assist in the proof of Theorem 4 .
Lemma 3 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be an Q-domain and I a CPMM of D,
493

fiVo & Foo

1. For each assumption   AB:  
/ IQF iff  is rejected by IQF .
2. If  = [ ]F Al  Lr(IQF ) then I |= [,  + ]dal .
Theorem 4 Let D be a Q-domain. If I is a CPMQM of D then  IQF is Q-plausible wrt
D.
Similar to the previous section, we now prove that not only can we derive a plausible set
of assumptions from a given CPMQM but we can also construct CPMQMs from a plausible
set of assumptions of a given domain description. The set of -relativised models of a
Q-domain D is denoted as M odQ
 (D).
The following observation is obvious:
Observation 5 Let D be a Q-domain and  a set of assumptions of D. For each I 
I
M odQ
 (D),  = QF .
Theorem 5 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be a Q-domain and   AB.  is Q-plausible wrt D
Q
iff M odQ
 (D) 6=  and for each I  M od (D), I is a CPMQM of D.
Theorem 6 Let D be a Q-domain. Furthermore, suppose that CP M QM (D) is the set of
Q
CPMQMs of D and
S P laus (D) is Qthe set of Q-plausible sets of assumptions of D, then
CP M QM (D) = P lausQ (D) M od (D).
Q-plausible sets of assumptions allow one to overcome scenarios in which expectation
failures (or, qualification surprises) arise, e.g. shooting a turkey with a loaded gun and
observing that the turkey is still alive. When such surprises arise, the reasoner knows
whos to blame: qualification assumptions. She can then accordingly remove the guilty
assumptions. Just as the anomalous models forming obstacle to early approaches to the
frame problem, similar anomalous models can also arise in solutions to the qualification
problem. This important issue related to the qualification problem has been thoroughly
discussed by Thielscher (2001) and a solution was presented within the framework of the
Fluent Calculus. To give the reader a flavour of this problem within our framework, we
invite the reader to consider the following classical example:
Example 5 Consider the problem of starting a car whose tail pipe could possibly be
blocked by a potato, formalised in our formalism as follows.
1. The set of inference rules R is:13
[ ]BlockedT P
,
[, ]AQGetStarted
[ ]HasP otato, [, ]InsertP otato, [, ]AQ BlockedT P
,
[]BlockedT P  [ ]F ABlockedT P
[ ]HasKey, [, ]T urnOnIgnition, [, ]AQ GetStarted
.
[]GetStarted  [ ]F AGetStarted
13. Of course we also have the frame-based inference rules for HasKey, BlockedT P , etc. but we omit them
from this representation for sake of readability.

494

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

2. The theory  is: {[0]HasP otato, [0]HasKey, [0]BlockedT P, [0]GetStarted,
[0, 1]InsertP otato, [1, 2]T urnOnIgnition}.
Of course, we have designed this example to try to avoid any possible troubles with
the frame problem. We have to consider two conflicting qualification assumptions in this
case which are [0, 1]AQBlockedT P and [1, 2]AQGetStarted . Given the above action theory, any
Q-plausible set of assumptions would contain exactly one of them. Thus, there will be at
least two extensions, one in which the car can not get started since the tailpipe is blocked
and its no longer consistent to assume [1, 2]AQ GetStarted . The other extension disqualifies
the action of inserting the potato into the tailpipe and thus the action of starting the car
becomes successful. Only the former is intuitive in this case and the account of Q-plausible
sets of assumptions fails to deliver this desired solution.
However, in exactly the same way the problem of anomalous models arising in the solution to the frame problem is tackled, the above problem is easily addressed within our framework. The key insight is of course also underlined by the notion of causality: [1]BlockT P
was caused (by the action [0, 1]InsertP otato) which in turn allows [1, 2]AQ GetStarted to be
derived. On the other hand, there was no cause that allows [0, 1]AQ BlockT P to be derived.
How is the above insight realised in our framework? The answer turns out to be rather simple: Just as the distinction between leniently rejected frame assumptions and non-leniently
rejected frame assumptions allows us to distinguish between normal changes (i.e. actiontriggered) and anomalous changes, a distinction between leniently rejected qualification assumptions and non-leniently rejected qualification assumptions will allow us to distinguish
between normal disqualifications (i.e. those underlined by a cause) and anomalous disqualifications. Thus, facing a collection of Q-plausible sets of assumptions, a reasoner simply
selects the set of assumptions that contains the smallest (with respect to set inclusion) set
of leniently rejected qualification assumptions.
The ability to introduce different argumentation-theoretic semantics for assumptionbased frameworks is arguably the biggest advantage of our approach. The following example
illustrates this critical point:
Example 6 We modify an example presented by Lin and Shoham (1995) which is in turn
a modification of Kautzs (1986) Stolen Car Problem. A spy possessed a microfilm of a top
secret evidence which an organisation, A, tried to steal. For some reason, another organisation, B, wanted to murder this spy. The microfilm was in the safe at the spys home at
time 0. The spy was not at home at time 0. A tried to steal the evidence between the
time points 0 and 1. The spy might return home at any time between 0 and 1. B tried to
murder the spy at any time between 0 and 1. return cancels the effects of steal, murder
cancels the effects of return and steal cancels the effects of murder. Any of the three
actions steal, return, and murder takes only one time step. The domain is formalised as
follows:  = {[0]EvStolen, [0]Alive, [0]AtHome}; and R contains
{

[, ]return, [, ]AQAtHome [, ]murder, [, ]AQAlive
[, ]steal, [, ]AQEvStolen
,
,
,
[]EvStolen  [ ]F AEvStolen []AtHome  [ ]F AAtHome []Alive  [ ]F AAlive

[ ]AtHome   <  [ ]Alive   <  [ ]EvStolen   < 
,
,
}.
[, ]AQEvStolen
[, ]AQAtHome
[, ]AQAlive
495

fiVo & Foo

Given the above formalisation of the problem, traditional accounts of non-monotonic
reasoning (i.e. Default Logic, circumscription, Autoepistemic Logic, etc.) can not provide
one with a solution since these formalisms can not produce any extension under their standard semantics. However, the argumentation-theoretic approach does gives several semantics for this problem including preferability semantics. Note, however, that all admissible
sets of assumptions and preferred sets of assumptions for this domain contain none of the
assumptions: [0, 1]AQEvStolen , [0, 1]AQAtHome , and [0, 1]AQAlive . This essentially means
that, under the admissibility and the preferability semantics, the reasoner could only infer
that none of the above actions would succeed On the other hand, our proposed plausible
semantics gives an alternative solution for this problem in which each consistent set of assumptions can contain at most one of the following three assumptions: [0, 1]AQ EvStolen ,
[0, 1]AQAtHome , and [0, 1]AQAlive . Moreover, each plausible set of assumptions must contain exactly one of them. Among the other two assumptions which do not belong to a
plausible set of assumptions, one is attacked and the other is leniently rejected.
We believe that the above examples have underlined the major advantages of our approach in which a reasoner is aware of the (defeasible) assumptions used in her reasoning as
well as being able to explicitly reason about these assumptions. The flexibility of allowing
a reasoner to introduce different argumentation-theoretic semantics for assumption-based
framework by simply varying the notion of acceptability of sets of assumptions is certainly
another advantage in favour of our approach.

6. More Complex Dynamic Domains and Indirect Effects
So far we havent taken into consideration the issues of concurrent actions and indirect
effects. To ensure that the formalisation introduced is expressive enough to deal with
complex domains, we will show how these issues are coped with by our approach. Firstly,
we motivate our formalisation with an informal discussion.
6.1 Concurrent and Non-Deterministic Events
Given our temporal representation, formulating concurrent events is not a difficult issue in
our framework. However, there are some subtleties which need to be carefully considered.
Firstly, the use of assumptions. As presented earlier in this paper, qualification assumptions
are fluent oriented, i.e. we qualify over the effects of action rather than over the action itself.
Whilst this manifests the capability of formulating actions with multiple effects, and thus
each effect should be qualified independently, it may fail to formalise concurrent events
with the same effects. For example, both actions hit the vase with a hammer and shoot
it with a loaded gun bring about the effect that the vase is broken. In other words, it
is essential that qualification assumptions be dependent on the actions that bring about
the effect under consideration. Thus, given n actions and m fluents whose values can
be changed by those actions, we have to potentially introduce 2  m  n qualifications
assumptions.14 Therefore, instead of subscripting the assumption symbols AQ with the
fluent literals from F  , we extend the set of subscripts of AQ, denoted as AF, to contain
14. In fact, as we will see later, there are potentially 2  m  (n + 1) qualification assumptions in this case
since there is one special event corresponding to all (natural) events that bring about the indirect effects.

496

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

both the action and the corresponding fluent literals. 15 For example, given the above two
actions hit and shoot and an additional action repair whose effect is change a broken vase
to being non-broken, viz. broken, we will need to introduce the following qualification
assumptions: AQHit-Broken , AQShoot-Broken and AQRepair-Broken . Therefore, syntactically
we also extend the set AB AQ = {[, ]AQ | ,   T E and   AF} and semantically
the function q : T  AQAF  T  {true, false}. In the definition of an interpretation
I = hh, , , q , f i, we also have I([, ]AQ , t) = q (( ), AQ , ()), where ,   T E
and   AF.
Though this does increase the complexity of the framework, it is the price we have to
pay for the expressiveness of the resulting system. To the best of our knowledge, none of
the existing formalisms possesses such an expressiveness.
How about non-deterministic actions? The solution turns out to be quite simple: we can
treat action non-determinism as a special kind of action qualification. For example, to formulate the Russian shooting scenario (Sandewall, 1994) in which a gun non-deterministically
gets loaded or not after spinning its revolver, the following action descriptions can be asserted:
[, ]spin, [, ]AQSpin-Loaded
[, ]spin, [, ]AQSpin-Loaded
adr1 =
and adr2 =
[]loaded  [ ]F Aloaded
[]loaded  [ ]F Aloaded
together with the following two qualification rules:
qr1 =

[]loaded
[]loaded
and qr2 =
.
[, ]AQSpin-Loaded
[, ]AQSpin-Loaded

The above guarantee that either []loaded or []loaded will follow from [, ]spin (remark that the set of qualification assumptions  AQ is maximised), but not both. As a
consequence, two possible extensions will arise given the above non-deterministic action.
Dealing with non-determinism could be more complicated when the information used to
encode the action description is disjunctive. As we only restrict the conclusion of an action
description rule to contain only fluent literals, such disjunctive effect is not straightforwardly
dealt with in our framework. However, note that the restriction is similar to that imposed
on action language A (Gelfond & Lifschitz, 1998). An extension to action descriptions
which is similar to the way the action language A is extended into the action language
C can be done to allow a complex expression in the conclusion of action description rule.
However, for the sake of presentation, we choose to use a simpler language to introduce our
framework to the reader.
6.2 Formalisation
From the analysis in the introductory section regarding indirect effects, we observe that
the ordering in which domain constraints are applied plays an essential role in a technically
sound framework. Moreover, its no longer guaranteed that domain constraints would be
strictly satisfied at every time point. 16 To help the reader better understand this technical
subtlety, its useful to think that changes are attributable to events. However, events
15. The reader is referred to section 3 for the general formalisation.
16. Of course, its not necessary that the state of the world at every time point is observable to a reasoner.
However, it is important that she be aware of such states and able to reason about them.

497

fiVo & Foo

are further divided into two categories: external and internal. Basically, external events
correspond to the direct effects of actions performed by some agents (including the reasoner.)
On the other hand, internal events correspond to the indirect effects when certain conditions
about the world are met and can be attributed to Nature. 17
Like external events, internal events also happen in a certain order. Although it is not
straightforward to observe this order 18 , it is important that a reasoner be able to reason
about them. Hence we propose to add one more dimension into the set of assumptions
of a given domain description. Since these assumptions play essentially the same role as
that of qualification assumptions, 19 we can subsume them under the set of qualification
assumptions AQAF . As they are not associated with any specific action, we can ignore the
initial of the action name from the subscripts of AQ. For example we will write AQ broken
in case we want to qualify over the fluent broken as an indirect effect, i.e. independently of
any action. Moreover, to avoid the axiomatiser from the confusion of determining the time
span taken by indirect effects, we will assume that it is atomic. It means all indirect effects
always take place between one time point and the next one. This does not mean that all
indirect effects have the same real-time duration, it simply means that relative to the given
time structure T they take place between two consecutive time points. This allows us to
avoid the granularity problem as it is irrelevant from the viewpoint of the problems we are
trying to solve.
6.2.1 A Representation Issue and Some Notations:
One important remark is in place here. Until now, we have used integers and the corresponding expressions to denote time points. There are two reasons for this pratice: (i) It
significantly simplifies the presentation, and (ii) Without the complication of the ramification problem, all time points which are reasoned about are also observable to the reasoner.
However, as will be discussed thoroughly in the next section, in the presence of ramifications
a time point at which some change takes place maight not be observable to the reasoner as
such a change could be one of the indirect effects after the execution of some action. Such
representation issues make the integer-based time structure employed so far in this paper
inappropriate. We do need a richer representation of time structure. Following Sandewalls
(1994) basic formulation, the only basic constant to be included in the representation of
the time structure T is denoted by the symbol  and is referred to as the origin of T.
The standard algebraic operations + and  are still employed to obtain time expressions
and bear their usual meanings. The relation symbol < will also be used to compare time
expressions. However, we can no longer allow expressions such as  + 1 for integers are no
longer elements of the time structure.
Given a time expression  :
17. We avoid the use of the terms exogenous/endogenous events to label these two categories because
throughout the literature of reasoning about action, exogenous events are used to refer to actions that
carried out by agents that are different from the reasoner or outside events whose occurrences are beyond
the reasoners control.
18. Unless indirect effects are somehow delayed and become observable to the reasoner, they usually take
place immediately after direct effects.
19. The only difference is that these assumptions are qualified over the indirect effects which can be considered
to be the effects of the actions of Nature.

498

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

 We will continue to denote the next time point of  by  + .
 We define  1+ to be  + and, let n > 1,  n+ to be ( (n1)+ )+ .
Furthermore, as we will assume throughout that an indirect effect takes place between
two consecutive time points, we also simplify the presentation by using the following syntactical sugar: instead of writing [,  + ]AQl (for some   T E and l  F  ), we will write
[ ]AQl . This also provides a simple way to distinguish between qualification assumptions
for ramificational effects and those caused directly by an action or event.
How are domain descriptions affected from this augmentation? The only change is for
the set RA of action descriptions which consists of rules either of the form
, [, ], [, ]AQ- l
[]l  [ ]F Al
or of the form

, [ ]AQl
.
 [ ]F Al

[ + ]l

For convenience, we will refer to the set of inference rules having the latter form as R I ,
, [ ]AQl
for some fluent literal l  F  }. Now, regarding
i.e. RI = {r  RA | r = +
[ ]l  [ ]F Al
the ramification problem, the basic idea is that the state obtained by updating the previous
state may not necessarily be stable due to the presence of indirect effects. By representing
indirect effects as causal rules (using inference rules in our framework) we can reason about
which causal rules have fired and (relatively) when. Moreover, since these causal rules
may not take the same amount of time to fire, we should be able to reason about different
possible orders in which they fire. This will be achieved by a distinction between stable and
unstable states.
Definition 6.1 A time-point expression   T E is stable wrt a given domain description
D = hLD , R, AB, i and   AB iff there does not exist any fluent literal l  F  such that
1.

, [ ]AQl
 RI and    `R , []AQl , and
[ + ]l  [ ]F Al

2.    6`R []l.
Definition 6.2 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be a domain description. A set of assumptions 
is said to be ramification-compliant iff
1. there does not exist any   AB AQ such that T hR (  {}) 6= T hR ()  {}.
2. there does not exist any unstable time-point expression   T E such that [ ]F A l  
for every l  F  .
We note that by using unstable time points, we have conceptually isolated the ramification problem from the task of reasoning about the (explicit) actions.
499

fiVo & Foo

Definition 6.3 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be a domain description. A set of assumptions 
is generally plausible for action domains, or simply AD-plausible, iff
  is ramification-compliant, and
  is Q-plausible relative to the above condition.
Remarks:
1. From the above definition, it can be seen that a solution for the ramification is (in
a sense) independent from the frame and the qualification problems regarding action
occurrences.
2. Given the above temporal ontology, it is worth noting that the traditional notion
of state constraints may no longer hold in this representation regarding time points.
More precisely, only states associated with stable time points are subject to these
constraints.
6.3 Connection to Causation-Based Formalisms
The question is, of course, whether the above computational mechanism gives satisfactory
conclusions for problems in reasoning about action. While many formalisms have been
proposed, a general criterion for reasoning about action formalisms still seems to be missing.
The major stream of research towards a solution to the ramification problem is based on the
notion of causality (e.g., Lin, 1995; McCain & Turner, 1995; Thielscher, 1997). As has been
discussed above, none of these approaches can deal with domains in which (potentially)
infinite sequences of indirect effects are present. Most of these approaches (including the
above three references), however, produce a successor state after the execution of an action
to capture changes that have taken place either as direct or as indirect effects of that action.
In this sub-section, we show how our formalism captures the notion of successor states in
the absence of the infinite sequences of indirect effects.
Definition 6.4 A domain description D = hL D , R, AB, i is non-stratified iff there exist
two sets    and {l1 , . . . , ln }  F  such that
1. for each 1  i  n,   {[ ]li } is R-consistent, for every   T E; and
2. for each 1  i  n, if k = (i mod n) + 1, then there exists a set  k   such that
  {[ ]li } `R k , and
k , [ ]AQlk
 RI .
[ + ]lk  [ ]F Alk
Of course, a domain description is stratified if and only if it is not non-stratified. Given a
def

domain description D = hLD , R, AB, i, well denote ED () = T hR (  ), the extension
of an action theory D according to . We will also write E D instead of ED () for brevity.
Definition 6.5 Let  = hT , F, Ai be a signature.
500

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

1. A set S  F  is an instantwise state iff for every l  F  , either l  S or l  S. IS
will be used to denote the set of instantwise states of ,
def

def

2. Let   F  and   T E , we denote  = {l | l  } and [ ] = {[ ]l | l  },
3. Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be a domain description. D is simplistic iff  = .
The motivation behind the introduction of instantwise states is to allow the reasoner
to reason about the intermediate states which may not be practically observable to her.
That is, when indirect effects (following an occurrence of an action or event) take place,
the world might transit through a number of intermediate states before becoming stabilised in a final state in which all domain constraints necessarily hold. The ability to
explicitly reason about such (unstable) intermediate states is one of the advantages offered by our approach. For instance, lets consider the scenario in Example 1 which
was originally introduced by Thielscher (1997). Thielschers (1997) approach allows two
possible successor states as the results of closing the switch sw 1 in the initial state S =
{sw1 , sw2 , sw3 , relay, light, detect}. These are T 1 = {sw1 , sw2 , sw3 , relay, light, detect}
and T2 = {sw1 , sw2 , sw3 , relay, light, detect}. However, to an outside observer who has
no idea about the tricky internal mechanism of this circuit, it could be quite difficult to
explain why T2 should be one of the possible outcomes of the action of closing the switch
sw1 : starting from an initial state in which detect and light are both off, after performing
an action toggle(sw1 ), light remains off but somehow detect becomes on. In other words,
Thielschers (1997) framework fails to render the intermediate (and unstable) state in which
light was on, albeit for only a short instant, before it was turned off again. On the other
hand, such states are explicitly represented and reasoned about as instantwise states in our
framework. As a consequence, domain constraints do not necessarily hold in an instantwise
state.
In the following, we abbreviate simplistic and stratified domain descriptions as SSDs.
Let   RI , we denote:
def

CON SR () = {l  F  |

[ ], [ ]AQl
 }.
[ + ]l  [ ]F Al

Similarly, let   RA , we denote
def

CON SA () = {l  F  |

[1 ], [1 , 2 ], [1 , 2 ]AQ-l
 }.
[2 ]l  [1 ]F Al

[1 ], [1 , 2 ], [1 , 2 ]AQ-l
 RA is applicable in S iff   S.
[2 ]l  [1 ]F Al
We use S to denote the set of action descriptions that is applicable (in S) regarding the
action .   S is a possible application of  in S iff CON S A () is consistent and there
does not exist any 0  S such that   0 and CON SA (0 ) is consistent.
The action description

Definition 6.6 Let  = hT , F, Ai be a signature and D = hL D , R, AB, i a SSD. Suppose
S  IS and   A. We formalise the direct effects of an action  using a relation Res D :
for all S, S 0  IS, (S, , S 0 )  ResD iff there is a possible application  of  in S such that:
501

fiVo & Foo

(i) CON SA ()  S 0 , and
(ii) there does not exist any instantwise state S 00 such that S 00 satisfies (i) and S 00 \ S 
S 0 \ S.
Definition 6.7 Let  = hT , F, Ai be a signature and D = hL D , R, AB, i a SSD. The
causation relation according to D, denoted as Causes D , is defined as follows: for all S, S 0 
IS, CausesD (S, S 0 ) iff there exists a non-empty set   R I of ramification inference rules
such that
(i) for each

[ ], [ ]AQl
 ,   S and
 [ ]F Al

[ + ]l

(ii) CON SR ()  S 0 , and
(iii) there does not exist any instantwise state S 00 such that S 00 satisfies (i) and (ii) and
S 00 \ S  S 0 \ S.
Given a domain description D, a state S  IS is stable regarding D iff there does not
exist any S 0  IS such that CausesD (S, S 0 ).
Definition 6.8 Let  = hT , F, Ai be a signature and D a SSD. Suppose w  IS and   A.
The state transition from w in D according to , denoted T rans D (w), is the transitive closure of CausesD regarding the state 1  IS satisfying (w, , 1 )  ResD . Formally,
T ransD (w) = {$  IS | there exists a sequence  1 , . . . , n  IS such that (w, , 1 ) 
ResD and $ = n and (i , i+1 )  CausesD for each 1  i < n and $ is stable regarding D}.
Let I be an interpretation for LD and t  T,
def

 we use [I]t to denote the instantwise state specified by I at time point t: [I] t = {l 
F  | I(l, t) = true}. If [I]t is stable then t is said to be a stable time point in I.
 we use NI to denote a function that maps a time point t  T to the next stable time
point in I: NI (t)  T such that [I]NI (t) is stable and for every u  T, if t < u < N I (t)
then [I]u is not stable.
Theorem 7 Let  = hT , F, Ai be a signature and D 0 = hLD , R, AB, i a SSD and   A0 .
Suppose that w  IS. Define a domain description D = hL D , R, AB, i, where  = {[] |
  w}{[, + ]}. A set   AB of assumptions is AD-plausible wrt D iff for each model
M of ED (), [M ]NM ()  T ransD ([M ] ), i.e. [M ]NM () belongs to the state transition
from [M ] in D according to .
We now re-consider the motivating examples introduced in Section 1.3.
Example 1 (continued.) We re-formulate the action theory for this example in terms of
our formalism:

502

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

[ ]sw1 , [ ]sw3 , [ ]AQrelay
,
[ + ]relay  [ ]F Arelay
[ ]swi , [ ]AQrelay
(i = 1, 3),
[ + ]relay  [ ]F Arelay
[ ]light, [ ]AQdetect
,
+
[ ]detect  [ ]F Adetect

[ ]sw1 , [ ]sw2 , [ ]AQlight
,
[ + ]light  [ ]F Alight
[ ]swi , [ ]AQlight
(i = 1, 2),
[ + ]light  [ ]F Alight
[ ]relay, [ ]AQsw2
,
[ + ]sw2  [ ]F Asw2
[ ]swi , [, ]togglei
(i = 1, 2, 3),
[]swi  [ ]F Aswi
[ ], [ ]F A
, where   F  .
[ + ]

[ ]swi , [, ]togglei
(i = 1, 2, 3),
[]swi  [ ]F Aswi

The theory is described as follows:
 = {[]sw1 , []sw2 , []sw3 , []relay, []light, []detect}  {[, N ()]toggle 1 }.
Consider  such that AQ = ABAQ \{[2+ ]AQdetect , [3+ ]AQdetect } and F A = ABF A \
+
2+
3+
light , [ ]F Arelay , [ ]F Asw2 , [ ]F Alight }.  is AD-plausible resulting in
the next stable state being  = {sw1 , sw2 , sw3 , relay, light, detect} at [4+ ].

{[+ ]F A

In addition, the set 0  AB, where 0AQ = ABAQ \ {[2+ ]AQdetect } and 0F A =
ABF A \ {[+ ]F Alight , [+ ]F Arelay , [2+ ]F Asw2 , [3+ ]F Alight , [3+ ]F Adetect }, is also
AD-plausible which results to the next stable state  0 = {sw1 , sw2 , sw3 , relay, light, detect}
at [4+ ].
Moreover, the set 00  AB, where 00AQ = ABAQ and 00F A = ABF A \{[N ()]F Alight ,
[+ ]F Arelay , [2+ ]F Asw2 , [2+ ]F Adetect , [3+ ]F Alight }, is also AD-plausible which also
results to the next stable state  0 at [4+ ]. In other words, the model implied by  0 reflects
a domain in which it takes the same amount of time for the detect to be on and the switch
sw2 to jump off. On the other hand, the model implied by  00 reflects a domain in which
the amount of time for the detect to be on is (approximately) equal to the amount of time
for switch sw2 to jump off and cause the light to be off as well. The detect implied by  is
so insensitive that even though the light and the relay are on at the same time ( 2+ ), the
relay causes switch sw2 to jump off and then leads to the light to be off as well but the
detect is yet on.

Example 2 (continued.) We re-formulate the action theory for this example in terms of
our formalism:

503

fiVo & Foo

[ ]upL1 , [ ]upL2 , [ ]AQopen
,
[ + ]open  [ ]F Aopen
[, ]f lipi , [ ]upLi
(i = 1, 2),
[]upLi  [ ]F AupLi
[1 , 2 ]hold closed, [1 ]open, 1    2
,
[ ]held closed  [ ]F Aheld closed
[ ], [ ]F A
, where   F  .
[ + ]

[, ]f lipi , [ ]upLi
(i = 1, 2),
[]upLi  [ ]F AupLi
[, ]close, [ ]upL1 , [ ]upL2
,
[]open  [ ]F Aopen
[ ]held closed
,
[ ]AQopen

The theory is described as follows:
 = {[]upL1 , []upL2 , []open, []held closed}{[c1 , c2 ]close, [c2 , c3 ]hold closed, [c4 , c5 ]f lip1 }
{  c1 < c2  c4 < c5  c3 }.
Consider   AB such that AQ = ABAQ \ {[c]AQopen | c2  c  c3 } and F A =
ABF A \ ({[c1 ]F Aopen }  {[c]F Aheld closed | c2  c  c3 }  {[c4 ]F AupL1 }).  is AD-plausible
and resulting in the following:
[c1 ]{upL1 , upL2 , open, held closed},
[c2 ]{upL1 , upL2 , open, held closed},
[c4 ]{upL1 , upL2 , open, held closed},
[c5 ]{upL1 , upL2 , open, held closed},
[c3 ]{upL1 , upL2 , open, held closed}.
Example 3 (continued.) The domain description:
[ ]sw1 , [ ]sw2 , [ ]AQrelay1
,
[ + ]relay1  [ ]F Arelay1
[ ]relay1 , [ ]AQsw2
,
[ + ]sw2  [ ]F Asw2
[ ]swi , [, ]togglei
(i = 1, 2),
[]swi  [ ]F Aswi
[ ], [ ]F A
, where   F  .
[ + ]

[ ]sw1 , [ ]sw2 , [ ]AQrelay2
,
[ + ]relay2  [ ]F Arelay2
[ ]relay2 , [ ]AQsw2
,
[ + ]sw2  [ ]F Asw2
[ ]swi , [, ]togglei
(i = 1, 2),
[]swi  [ ]F Aswi

The state of the circuit in Figure 2 is captured by the following action theory:
 = {[]sw1 , []sw2 , []relay1 , []relay2 }{[c1 , c2 ]toggle1 , [c3 , c4 ]toggle1 } {  c1 <
c2 < c 3 < c 4 }
Consider   AB such that AQ = ABAQ and F A = AB F A \ ({[c1 ]F Asw1 } 
{[c3 ]F Asw1 }  {[c]F Arelay1 | c2  c  c3 and c = (c2 )k+ where k = 4i and i = 0, 1, 2, . . .}
{[c]F Asw2 , [c]F Arelay1 | c2  c  c3 and c = (c2 )k+ where k = 4i + 1 and i = 0, 1, 2, . . .}
{[c]F Arelay2 | c2  c  c3 and c = (c2 )k+ where k = 4i + 2 and i = 0, 1, 2, . . .}
{[c]F Asw2 , [c]F Arelay2 | c2  c  c3 and c = (c2 )k+ where k = 4i + 3 and i = 0, 1, 2, . . .}).
 is AD-plausible resulting to several possible models for this domain depending on when
switch sw1 is toggled off:
[c1 ]{sw1 , sw2 , relay1 , relay2 },
504

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

[c2 ]{sw1 , sw2 , relay1 , relay2 },
[c3 ]{sw1 , sw2 , relay1 , relay2 },
[c4 ]{sw1 , sw2 , relay1 , relay2 }.
Remark:20
Here, it is also important to raise the question whether our solution to the ramification
problem conflicts with the formulation of concurrent actions. When two actions  1 and 2
are concurrently performed: 1 causes an indirect effect E and 2 triggers a non-terminating
chains of effects. If the direct and indirect effects caused by  2 dont interfere with 1 s
production of E then the reasoner can reason about time points after the execution of  1
where E holds for being an indirect effect of  1 . These time points are of course unstable
due to the non-terminating chains of indirect effects caused by  2 . On the other hand,
if the direct and indirect effects caused by  2 have the potential to prevent the former
from producing E, the reasoning could be more complex. If it is observable that the direct
effects of both actions take place at the same time then the concurrent occurrences of the two
actions can be viewed as one single occurrence of one complex actions whose direct effects are
a combination of the direct effects of the two actions. Further reasoning about ramifications
will then be carried out as usual. On the other hand, when the reasoner herself is unsure
about the temporal correlation between the direct effects of the two actions, every possible
order of changes must be taken into consideration leading to a highly nondeterministic
outcome about what fluent will hold in the future time points. However, such a situation
can still be handled nicely by our formalisation. The only representation issue which is
not addressed by our framework is about indirect effects with duration. As asserted above,
given the state of the world at a time point  , we assume that all subsequent indirect
effects will take place at the next time point  + . This certainly fails to deal properly with
indirect effects whose durations are different. A simple solution to this problem can be to
associate one next time point operator for each possible indirect effect. This, however, will
significantly complicate the representation.

7. Discussion and Future Work
We developed a uniform framework for reasoning about action using an argumentationtheoretic approach (more precisely, assumption-based approach). We have also presented
how our framework copes with the frame, the qualification and the ramification problems in
several sophisticated settings. We have shown how our framework can be naturally extended
to become more expressive.
We also explored a new abstraction level which we believe to be an intermediate layer
between the common sense knowledge and the scientific knowledge. Sophisticated domain
knowledge as well as representation are, we argue, required to achieve an adequate underlying representation and reasoning process. Among the merits of this approach, we emphasise
the following:
 Non-monotonicity is handled by assumptions and argumentation-theoretic approach.
20. The authors would like to acknowledge an anonymous referee for pointing out this very subtle issue.

505

fiVo & Foo

 The flexibility of working with different kinds of information representation since there
is no restriction on the syntax of the system.
 Expressivity: temporal information is explicitly represented. Thus the system is capable of capturing many important features of temporal reasoning.
As reviewed in the introductory section of this paper, numerous approaches to reasoning
about action have been proposed. As such, much research related to these approaches and
frameworks has evolved around the central problems addressed in this paper, namely the
frame, qualification and the ramification problems. However, as non-monotonic reasoningbased formalisms for reasoning about actions were shown to be flawed by Hanks and McDermott (1987), many existing solutions of the frame problem are based on other approaches
which are usually monotonic. Since one of the inherent properties of the argumentationtheoretic approach is monotonicity, few have attempted to solve the problems of reasoning
about actions using this approach.
A framework for reasoning about actions under the argumentation-theoretic approach is
independently proposed by Kakas, Miller, and Toni (1999, 2000, 2001). In their approach,
the admissibility semantics is also employed to resolve conflicts between adversary arguments. To represent common sense knowledge, e.g. the common sense law of inertia, an
order is imposed on the set of inference rules of the assumption-based framework. The computation of the arguments and their competing is performed on top of the so-called proof
trees. Nodes on the proof trees are arguments which are sets of propositions. 21 Construction of proof trees is on the same level of hardness as known frameworks for argumentationtheoretic computation. While their framework allows the persistence of (inertial) fluents to
be captured and dealt with, it is not very clear whether their formalisation can be extended
to deal with other problems of reasoning about actions such as the qualification and the
ramification problems.
More recently, Dimopoulos, Kakas, and Michael (2004), and Bracciali and Kakas (2004)
extended Kakas et al.s framework to deal with the ramification and the qualification problems. Essentially, in their solution to the ramification problem, the so-called r-propositions
of the following form:22
L whenever C
are added to the domain description. A resulting model for a given domain description will
then be computed by first computing all possible indirect effects as the fixed point of repeated application of r-propositions, and then completing the model by allowing unaffected
fluent literals to persist over time. It should be clear that the above representation of indirect effects is quite restrictive as it doesnt allow more complex expressions for the conditions
of an indirect effects and the indirect effects themselves. These restriction is essentially due
to their use of Answer Set Programming (ASP) as the underlying computation mechanism
of their framework. On the other hand, their solution to the qualification problem lies in the
use of default rules for representing the effects of actions. This approach is fairly similar to
21. In Kakas et al.s (1999, 2000) terminologies, each node is a set of arguments which is equivalent to the
notion of arguments in our exposition.
22. L is a fluent literal and C is a set of fluent literals which is essentially equivalent to a conjunction of
fluent literals.

506

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

Thielschers (2001) solution to the qualification problem discussed above. As their approach
is essentially based on stability semantics, its not clear how the argumentation-theoretic
approach will bring about any benefit to their framework.
As discussed earlier in the paper, the key insight behind the solutions implemented in
our framework is the exploitation of causality to drive the inference. It is causality that has
helped throughout in our solutions to the frame and the qualification problems to provide
the mechanisms to eliminate the anomalous models while retaining the intuitive models
during the process of reasoning. This insight is certainly a more general version of the conclusions derived by Sandewall (1994) when investigating the reason behind the production
of anomalous models in early approaches to the frame problem, namely the failure to distinguish between normal changes which are triggered by actions and abnomalous changes.
Sandewalls insight has certainly originated the occlusion-based solution to the frame problem (Sandewall, 1994; Doherty, 1994; Gustafsson & Doherty, 1996). Roughly speaking, in
this approach each action type is associated with a subset of fluents that are influenced
by the action. Also, a predicate Occlude is introduced to allow this subset of fluents to
be specified. When reasoning about dynamic domains, changes are minimised with the
exception of the fluents specified by Occlude. In other words, Occlude distinguishes the
normal changes (associated with the action types) from the anomalous changes and thus
avoids unintended models from arising.
Regarding the qualification problem, Thielschers (2001) solution to the problem of
anomalous models in relation to the qualification problem shares the key insight of causality
with our approach. However, Thielschers framework is based on the standard semantics
of Default Logic (with the initial theories are generated using circumscription). Thus, his
approach does not deal with problem domains where standard semantics of Default Logic
does not produce an extension. Furthermore, as discussed in the introductory section of our
paper, in Thielschers framework qualifications are taken over the executability conditions
for the actions instead of over different effects of the actions.
In parallel to the causality-based insight to dynamic domains, other mechanisms for
solving various problems of reasoning about action exist. For instance, a number of approaches employ the concept of chronological ignorance (Shoham, 1987, 1988) to tackle
the problem of anomalous models. In general, causality-based frameworks and approaches
based on chronological ignorance share the notion of directedness: when changes are minimised chronologically, causes are minimised instead of effects as causes are likely to precede
effects. However, as a consequence, backward reasoning is blocked which prevents chronological ignorance-based approaches from dealing with surprises and expectation failures.
Furthermore, non-deterministic actions or incomplete state knowledge are known to cause
difficulty to chronological minimization. For a more detailed comparison between causalitybased approaches and their counterparts that are based on chronological ignorance, the
reader is referred to an article by Thielscher (2001). On the other hand, approaches that
are based on Motivated Action Theory (MAT) (Amsterdam, 1991; Stein & Morgenstern,
1994) can be considered as a special case of the causality-based paradigm. MAT frameworks also advocate for the insight that an appropriate notion of causality is necessary when
assuming away abnormalities. MAT frameworks, however, dont cope very well with the
explanation problem and the ramification problem as pointed out by Jr. (1999) who also
introduce an approach to improve MAT and overcome these problems.
507

fiVo & Foo

Nonetheless, several issues still remain within our framework and will need further treatment to achieve an optimal solution. Firstly, this formalism may not be very suitable for
the large-scale problems as too many assumptions will need to be taken into account. To
address this problem, a localisation procedure is invented to guarantee that only an adequate sub-language will be used to capture the circumstance the agent is reasoning about.
As a consequence, the set of assumptions will be restricted to those which are necessary to
infer the conclusions the agent is interested. This idea is under development. Furthermore,
while a uniform solution to all major problems of reasoning about action may be quite
attractive especially regarding the toy scenarios such as those considered in this paper as
well as in the literature, such a solution may not be pragmatic. By considering the locality
account of reasoning, in particular of the assumptions used in default reasoning, promising
solution can be achieved from both computational and representational points of view. We
are undertaking further investigation towards this research direction.
A major limitation of our framework is the ability to deal with disjunctive axiomatisation of action occurrences. For instance, when the domain axiomatisation constains a
disjunction about the action occurrences such as [t 1 , t2 ]1  [t1 , t2 ]2 , then no plausible sets
of assumptions, and accordingly, no CPMMs (resp. CPMQMs) will be produced to account
for the effects of these actions. While an initial formalisation of our framework allowed
complex expressions for action occurrences in the premises of inference rules which overcame this problem, the formalisation appeared to be too complex and some of the technical
results could not be established. Further investigation, therefore, is needed to overcome
this problem while avoiding to produce an overly complex formalisation.
Provided that our formalism has been designed to provide a general framework for reasoning about action, the following comes as a natural question: To what extent the proposed
approach can be used to formalise dynamic domains? Sandewall (1994) suggests that one
should systematise a framework for reasoning about action against some standard criteria
to provide the formal indications about the expressiveness and capacity of a formalism.
This is in contrast to the more traditional approach that had prevailed for many years in
reasoning about action in which one tries to come up with some examples to show that no
existing approaches are able to deal with such a scenario and claims that ones approach is
better than others in which it can solve the proposed scenario.
Relative to Sandewalls standard criteria, our approach enjoys the following properties:
1. Our approach is non-inertia as it allows observations about the later state to correct the systems predictions about those states using some explanation mechanism
through the use of assumptions.
2. Our formalism is able to deal with non-deterministic and concurrent events.
Another issue is the abduction problem which is also known in the literature as the
explanation problem. For example, in the Stolen car scenario, by observing that the car
disappeared from the parking lot where the reasoner had left it, an expectation failure arises.
Most formalisms would try to accommodate this problem by introducing a stealing action
as part of the vocabulary and try to bind the disappearance of the car to this action. This
arguably is not very intuitive as there is no good reason why we should include this action
in the vocabulary in the first place but not others such as the car being towed away by the
508

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

police or a fairy turning the car into a pumpkin, etc. From a pragmatic point of view, some
reasoners may just simply acquire more information (perhaps from the police) instead of
confusing themselves with all kinds of explanations towards possible but uncertain causes.
In other words, we effectively isolate the issues of deducing the new conclusions from the
existing knowledge base from abducing the possible causes of some observations. This is
of course closely related to Shanahans approach in his IJCAI95 paper (Shanahan, 1989)
whose title clearly indicated that Prediction is Deduction but Explanation is Abduction.
We are also working on an assumption-based framework to solve the abduction problem.
Acknowledgements
This work was performed when the first author was at the School of Computer Science and
Engineering, University of New South Wales. The authors wish to thank other members
of the Knowledge Systems Group, in paricular Dongmo Zhang and Maurice Pagnucco, and
the anonymous reviewers of an earlier version of this paper for very helpful comments and
suggestions that have significantly improve the quality as well as the readability of this
paper. The first author was partially supported by an International Postgraduate Research
Scholarship (IPRS) sponsored by the Australian government. The first author is presently
supported by a by a DEST IAP grant (2004-2006, grant CG040014).

Appendix A
Theorem 1 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be an S-domain. If I is a CPMM of D then  IQF is
plausible.
Proof: Suppose that I is a CPMM of D,
(i) we prove that IQF is presumable:
IQF is R-consistent since I is a model of D. From Observation 2, we have  IQF is
closed and does not attack itself. From Lemma 1, for each assumption   AB, if  
/  IQF
then  is rejected by IQF .
(ii) we prove that Lr(IQF ) is minimal:
Suppose by way of contradiction that there exists a presumable set of assumptions 
(wrt D) such that Lr()  Lr(IQF ). Let I be the -relativised model of D. It is obvious
that I is coherent. We will derive a contradiction by proving that Occ I  OccI :
(ii.1) OAD  OccI : obvious as OAD = {((1 ), , (2 ))  T  A0  T |  |= [1 , 2 ]},
and I is a model of D.
(ii.2) DAS()  OccI : Let (t, dal , t+ )  DAS(), then there do not exist any action
  A0 and s  T such that
r=

, [1 , 2 ], [1 , 2 ]AQl
R
[2 ]l  [1 ]F Al

and I |= prem(r)[1 /s, 2 /t+ ]}. Thus, the assumption  = [t]F Al  Lr(). Thus,  
Lr(IQF ) (from the hypothesis.) From Lemma 2, I |= [t, t + ]dal . Thus (t, dal , t+ )  OccI .
(ii.3) OccI 6 OccI : Let  = [t]F Al  Lr(IQF ) \ Lr() for some t  T and l  F  .
Since I is a CPMM of D, from Lemma 2, I |= [t, t + ]dal . Thus (t, dal , t+ )  OccI .
509

fiVo & Foo

Moreover,  
/ Lr() iff either (a)   , or (b) there is   A 0 such that
, [1 , 2 ], [1 , 2 ]AQl
 R and    `R [1 /t, 2 /t+ ], [t, t+ ], [t, t+ ]AQl
r=
[2 ]l  [1 ]F Al
iff, following the construction of -relativised models, I  6|= [t, t+ ]dal . Thus (t, dal , t+ ) 
/
OccI . Therefore, OccI  OccI .
Hence, Lr(IQF ) is minimal and IQF is plausible.
2
Theorem 2 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be an S-domain and   AB.  is plausible wrt D
iff M odS (D) 6=  and for each I  M odS (D), I is a CPMM of D.
Proof:
() Suppose that   AB is plausible wrt D. Then  is R-consistent, i.e.  6` R
false. From the construction of -relativised models, M od S (D) 6= .
For each I = hh, , , q , f i  M odS (D), we prove that I is a CPMM of D.
(i) I is a coherent S-model of D: obvious from the definition of -relativised models.
(ii) OccI is minimal:
Assume the contrary, i.e. there is a non-empty set M I = {J | J is a coherent S-model
of D and OccJ  OccI }. Let H  MI such that there does not exist any model J  M I
and F AH  F AJ .
Consider the set of assumptions H
QF :
H
(ii.a) QF is presumable wrt D:
 H
QF is closed and does not attack itself (since H is a model of D);

 Let   AB, if  = [ ]F Al 6 H
QF (for some   T E and l  F ) and  isnt rejected by
H
QF then we can easily construct a model J that interprets everything except F A the
same as H and F AJ = F AH  {(( ), F Al )}. Obviously, J  MI and F AJ  F AH
which is a contradiction. Thus  is rejected by  H
QF .

Therefore, H
QF is presumable.
H
(ii.b) Lr(QF )  Lr():
OccH  OccI since H  MI .
H
Let   Lr(H
QF ). Since AB AQ  QF ,  = [t]F Al  AB F A for some t  T and

l  F . From the definition of leniently rejected assumptions,    H
QF 6`R false but
H
  QF  {} `R false. But then, from the definition of coherent models, H |= [t, t + ]dal
(since H is a coherent model of D). Thus, I |= [t, t + ]dal .
From the construction of -relativised models, [t]F A l 6 . Thus,  is rejected by 
(since  is plausible wrt D). Also from the construction of -relativised models,    6` R
I
. Therefore,   Lr(), or Lr(H
QF )  Lr(). Now, Occ = OAD  DAS(). OAD 
OccH since H is a model of D. Thus, OccI \ OccH = DAS() \ OccH . Let (t, dal , t+ ) 
DAS() \ OccH . From the construction of -relativised models,  = [t]F A l  Lr().
H
Suppose further that   Lr(H
/ H
QF ). Then,  
QF (as QF is presumable). We
construct a model J in such a way that J interprets everything except F A the same as H.
510

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

From the definition of coherent models, (t, da l , t+ ) 
/ OccH iff either (1) H 6|= [t]l  [t+ ]l;
or (2) there is   A0 , and
r=

, [1 , 2 ], [1 , 2 ]AQl
R
[2 ]l  [1 ]F Al

and    |= prem(r)[1 /t, 2 /t+ ], i.e.,    |= [1 /t, 2 /t+ ], [t, t+ ], [t, t+ ]AQl . Since
 = [t]F Al  Lr(), condition (2) can not be satisfied.
Thus, (t, dal , t+ ) 
/ OccH iff H 6|= [t]l  [t+ ]l. In other words, it is consistent to add
the assumption [t]F Al to the set of assumptions H
QF . Or, from a model-theoretic point of
view, to augment the denotation of F A in H with (t, F A l ) and we can still obtain a coherent
S-model J such that F AH  F AJ . But this is a contradiction. Hence,  
/ Lr( H
QF ).
H
We have shown that Lr(QF )  Lr().
From (ii.a) and (ii.b) we are led to the conclusion that Occ I is minimal. As a consequence, I is a CPMM of D (from (i) and (ii)).
() Suppose that M odS (D) 6=  and for each I  M odS (D), I is a CPMM of D.
We prove that  is plausible wrt D. Take an arbitrary model I  M od S (D). Following
Observation 4,  = IQF . From Theorem 1 and the hypothesis that I is a CPMM of D,
we conclude that  is plausible wrt D.
2
Theorem 3 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be an S-domain. Furthermore, suppose that CP M M (D)
is the set of CPMMsSof D and P laus(D) is the set of plausible sets of assumptions of D,
then CP M M (D) = P laus(D) M odS (D).
Proof:
()
then M odS (D)  CP M M (D) (Following Theorem 2). ThereS Let   P laus(D),
S
fore, P laus(D) M od (D)  CP M M (D).
() Let I  CP M M (D), then IQF  P laus(D) (Following Theorem 1).
We prove that I  M odI (D) based on Definition 5.4:
QF

1) I is an S-model of D,
2) for each  = [ ]F Al  ABF A (for some   T E and l  F  ),   IQF iff (( ), F Al ) 
F AI (Following the definition of IQF - Definition 5.3)
3) We prove that OccI = OAD  DAS(IQF ):
(3.)
 OAD = {((1 ), , (2 ))  T  A0  T |  |= [1 , 2 ]}  OccI (as I is a model of D),
 (t, dal , t+ )  DAS(IQF ).
From Definition 5.4,
(i)  = [t]F Al 
/ IQF , and
(ii) there exists no action   A0 such that:
r=

, [1 , 2 ], [1 , 2 ]AQl
R
[2 ]l  [1 ]F Al
511

fiVo & Foo

and    |= [1 /t, 2 /t+ ], [t, t+ ], [t, t+ ]AQl .
From Lemma 1,  
/ IQF iff  is rejected by IQF iff  as I is a coherent model 
either (a) there are   A0 and s  T such that
r=

, [1 , 2 ], [1 , 2 ]AQl
R
[2 ]l  [1 ]F Al

and I |= prem(r)[1 /s, 2 /t+ ],
or (b) I |= [t, t+ ]dal .
Since (a) violates condition (ii) above, (b) must be the case. Thus (t, da l , t+ )  OccI .
 DAS(IQF )  OccI .
 OccI  OAD  DAS(IQF ).
(3.) Suppose that OccI 6 OAD  DAS(IQF ). From (3.), we have OccI  OAD 
DAS(IQF ). Since IQF is plausible, there exists a model J  M od SI (D) such that J
QF

is a CPMM of D. Following Definition 5.4, Occ J = OAD  DAS(IQF ) which is a proper
subset of OccI . Contradiction! Therefore, OccI  OAD  DAS(IQF ).
Thus we have shown that I  M odSI (D),
QF
S
 M  P laus(D) M odS (D) (Since IQF  P laus(D))
S
 CP M M (D)  P laus(D) M odS (D).
S
2
Therefore, CP M M (D) = P laus(D) M odS (D).
Theorem 4 Let D be a Q-domain. If I is a CPMQM of D then  IQF is Q-plausible wrt
D.
Proof:
Suppose that I is a CPMQM of D,
(i) its easy to verify that IQF is semiQ-plausible wrt D: similar to the proof of theorem
1, but using Lemma 3 instead of Lemma 1 and Lemma 2.
(ii) IAQ is maximal:
Assume the contrary, i.e. there exists a set of assumptions  such that  is semiQplausible wrt D and IAQ  AQ . Since  is presumable,    is R-consistent. Let I  be
the -relativised model of D. Obviously, I  is a coherent Q-model of D. Its easy to verify
that OccI is minimal because otherwise a coherent Q-model J (of D) can be constructed
such that OccJ  OccI . We have OccI = OAD  DAS() and OAD  OccJ since J is a
model of D. Thus there exists (t, da , t+ )  DAS() \ OccJ . But then JQF is presumable
wrt D and Lr(JQF )  Lr() which is a contradiction. Thus, Occ I is minimal. But then
the model I is a PMQM of D and AQI  AQI which contradicts with the fact that I is
a CPMQM of D. Therefore, IAQ is maximal.
(iii) IF A is maximal (relative to (i) and (ii)):
Assume the contrary, i.e. there exists a set of assumptions  such that  is semiQplausible wrt D and AQ is maximal and IF A  F A . Let I be the -relativised model
512

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

of D. Similar to the proof in part (ii), we can easily verify that I  is a PMQM of D. As the
fact that AQ is maximal and IF A  F A contradicts with the given hypothesis that I is
a CPMQM of D, we conclude that IF A is maximal. Therefore, IQF is Q-plausible wrt D. 2
Theorem 5 Let D = hLD , R, AB, i be a Q-domain and   AB.  is Q-plausible wrt D
Q
iff M odQ
 (D) 6=  and for each I  M od (D), I is a CPMQM of D.
Proof:
() Suppose that  is Q-plausible wrt D.
As  is presumable,    is R-consistent. Following the construction of -relativised
models, M odQ
 (D) 6= .
Let I  M odQ
 (D):
(i) its easy to verify that I is coherent from the construction of -relativised models.
(ii) OccI is minimal:
Assume the contrary, i.e. the set I = { |  is a coherent Q-model of D and Occ  
OccI } is non-empty.
Let J  I such that the following conditions are satisfied:
1. there does not exist any model    I such that Occ  OccJ .
2. AQJ is maximal relative to 1.
3. F AJ is maximal relative to 1. and 2.
Consider the set of assumptions JQF : Obviously, JQF is closed and does not attach
itself. For each   AB, if  
/ JQF then  is rejected by JQF , otherwise it would violate
the maximality of JAQ and JF A . Thus, JQF is presumable.
Remark that OccJ  OccI . Besides, OccI = OAD  DAS(). But OAD  OccJ as
J is a model of D. Thus there exists (t, da  , t+ )  DAS() \ OccJ . But then JQF is
presumable wrt D and Lr(JQF )  Lr() which is a contradiction. Thus, Occ I is minimal.
As a consequence, I is a PMQM of D.
(iii) AQI is maximal (relative to (i) and (ii)):
Assume the contrary, i.e. the set I = { |  is a PMQM of D and AQI  AQ } is
non-empty.
Let J  I such that the following conditions are satisfied:
1. F AJ is maximal; and
2. AQJ is maximal relative to 1.
We can prove that that JQF is semi-Q-plausible (i.e. presumable wrt D and Lr F A (JQF )
is minimal):
That JQF is presumable wrt D is easy to verify.
Its also easy to verify that LrF A (JQF ) is minimal as J is coherent and OccJ is minimal.
This would guarantee that the set of occurrences of dummy actions in J is minimised and as
a consequence the set of leniently rejected frame assumptions is also minimised. Formally,
if a presumable set of assumptions  is such that Lr F A ()  LrF A (JQF ) then the relativised model I is a coherent Q-model and OccI  OccJ , which is a contradiction
with the fact that J  I and thus J is a PMQM of D.
Thus, JQF is semi-Q-plausible wrt D. But, AQ  JAQ which is a contradiction.
Therefore, we have shown that AQI is maximal (relative to (i) and (ii)).
513

fiVo & Foo

(iv) Now, we can prove that F AI is maximal (relative to (i), (ii) and (iii)):
Assume the contrary, i.e. there exists a PMQM J of D such that F A I  F AJ .
Among those models satisfying the above condition, we choose a model K such that
0
there does not exist any PMQM K 0 of D such that F AK  F AK . Thus, K is a CPMQM
of D.
Following Theorem 4, we have the set of assumptions  K
QF is Q-plausible and F A 
I
K
K
F A since F A  F A . Contradiction with the hypothesis that  is Q-plausible.
From (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) we are led to the conclusion that I is a canonical prioritised
minimal Q-model of D.
() Suppose that M odQ
 (D) 6=  and I is a canonical prioritised minimal model of D
Q
for each I  M od (D), we prove that  is plausible.
I
Take an arbitrary model I  M odQ
 (D). Following Observation 5,  =  QF . From
Theorem 4 and the hypothesis that I is a canonical prioritised minimal Q-model of D, we
conclude that  is Q-plausible.
2
Theorem 6 Let D be a Q-domain. Furthermore, suppose that CP M QM (D) is the set of
Q
CPMQMs of D and
S P laus (D) is Qthe set of Q-plausible sets of assumptions of D, then
CP M QM (D) = P lausQ (D) M od (D).
Proof: Similar to the proof of Theorem 3.

2

Theorem 7 Let  = hT , F, Ai be a signature and D 0 = hLD , R, AB, i a SSD and   A0 .
Suppose that w  IS. Define a domain description D = hL D , R, AB, i, where  = {[] |
  w}{[, + ]}. A set   AB of assumptions is AD-plausible wrt D iff for each model
M of ED (), [M ]NM ()  T ransD ([M ] ), i.e. [M ]NM () belongs to the state transition
from [M ] in D according to .
Proof:
() Suppose that   AB is AD-plausible wrt D, we prove that for each model M of
ED (), [M ]NM ()  T ransD ([M ] ).
Let M  M od(ED ()), as M |= , we have M |= [] iff   w. Thus w = [M ]  .
We prove that [M ]NM ()  T ransD (w), i.e. there exists a sequence 1 , . . . , n  IS such
that (w, , 1 )  ResD and [M ]NM () = n and (i , i+1 )  CausesD for each 1  i < n.
If w
 = : to the reasoners knowledge,  is not applicable in the instantwise state w
due to either non-executability of  in w, or  does not bring about any effects concerned
+
+
to the reasoner. Thus, [M ] = w. Of course, (w, , [M ] )  ResD .
If w
 6= : let  = {r  RA | M |= prem(r) and M |= cons(r)}, we prove that  is a
possible application of  in w.
0
Apparently,   w
 .  is maximal since otherwise we can construct a model M such
that M 0 satisfies the qualification assumption of the additional action description rule. But
0
it means M 0 is a PMQM model of D such that AQM  AQM . Thus M is not a CPMQM
of D. Following Theorem 5,  is not Q-plausible wrt D. Contradiction.
We now prove that there does not exists any instantwise state S such that CON S A () 
+
S and [M ] \ w  S \ w.
514

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

Assume the contrary, i.e. there exists a fluent literal   F  such that   (S \ w) \
+
([M ] \ w).
Then M 6|= []F A since M is a model of D.
Construct a model M 0 in such a way that M 0 interprets everything the same as M except
0
0
F A, and F AM = F AM  {(, F A )}. Obviously, M 0 is a PMQM of D and AQM = AQM ,
0
but F AM  F AM . Thus M is not a CPMQM of D. Following Theorem 5,  is not
+
Q-plausible wrt D. Contradiction. Therefore, (w, , [M ]  )  ResD .
() Suppose that for each model M of E D (), [M ]NM ()  T ransD ([M ] ), we prove
that   AB is AD-plausible wrt D which is obvious.
2

References
Amsterdam, J. B. (1991). Temporal reasoning and narrative conventions. In Allen, J. F.,
Fikes, R., & Sandewall, E. (Eds.), KR91: Principles of Knowledge Representation
and Reasoning, pp. 1521, Cambridge, MA. Morgan Kaufmann.
Baker, A. B. (1989). A simple solution to the Yale Shooting problem. In Brachman, R. J.,
Levesque, H. J., & Reiter, R. (Eds.), KR89: Principles of Knowledge Representation
and Reasoning, pp. 1120, San Mateo, California. Morgan Kaufmann.
Baral, C. (1995). Reasoning about actions: Non-deterministic effects, constraints, and qualification. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Bondarenko, A., Dung, P. M., Kowalski, R. A., & Toni, F. (1997). An abstract,
argumentation-theoretic approach to default reasoning. Artificial Intelligence Journal,
93, 63101.
Bracciali, A., & Kakas, A. C. (2004). Frame consistency: computing with causal explanations. In 10th International Workshop on Non-Monotonic Reasoning (NMR 2004),
pp. 7987.
Castilho, M. A., Gasquet, O., & Herzig, A. (1999). Formalizing action and change in modal
logic I: The frame problem. Journal of Logic and Computation, 9(5), 701735.
Dimopoulos, Y., Kakas, A. C., & Michael, L. (2004). Reasoning about actions and change
in answer set programming. In International Conference on Logic Programming and
Nonmonotonic Reasoning - LPNMR 04, pp. 6173.
Doherty, P. (1994). Reasoning about action and change using occlusion. In European
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 401405.
Doherty, P., & Kvarnstrom, J. (1998). Tackling the qualification problem using fluent dependency constraints: Preliminary report. In 5th Workshop on Temporal Representation
and Reasoning - TIME, pp. 97104.
Doyle, J. (1979). A truth maintenance system. Artificial Intelligence Journal, 12(3), 231
272.
Drakengren, T., & Bjareland, M. (1999). Reasoning about action in polynomial time.
Artificial Intelligence Journal, 115, 124.
Fikes, R., & Nilsson, N. J. (1971). STRIPS: A new approach to the application of theorem
proving to problem solving. Artificial Intelligence Journal, 2(3/4), 189208.
515

fiVo & Foo

Foo, N. Y., Zhang, D., Vo, Q. B., & Peppas, P. (2001). Circumscriptive models and automata. In Thielscher, M., & Williams, M.-A. (Eds.), Workshop on Non-monotonic
Reasoning, Action and Change - colocated with IJCAI-01.
Gelfond, M., & Lifschitz, V. (1998). Action languages. Electronic Transactions on AI,
3(16), 193210.
Ginsberg, M. L., & Smith, D. E. (1988). Reasoning about action I: A possible worlds
approach. Artificial Intelligence Journal, 35(2), 165196.
Giunchiglia, E., Kartha, G. N., & Lifschitz, V. (1997). Representing action: Indeterminacy
and ramifications. Artificial Intelligence Journal, 95(2), 409438.
Giunchiglia, E., & Lifschitz, V. (1998). An action language based on causal explanation:
Preliminary report. In National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 623630.
Green, C. (1969). Application of theorem proving to problem solving. In International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 219240.
Gustafsson, J., & Doherty, P. (1996). Embracing occlusion in specifying the indirect effects
of actions. In Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, pp. 8798.
Haas, A. R. (1987). The case for domain-specific frame axioms. In The frame problem in
artificial intelligence: proc. of 1987 workshop. Morgan Kaufmann.
Hanks, S., & McDermott, D. (1987). Nonmonotonic logic and temporal projection. Artificial
Intelligence Journal, 33(3), 379412.
Jr., C. L. O. (1999). Explanatory update theory: Applications of counterfactual reasoning
to causation. Artificial Intelligence Journal, 108(1-2), 125178.
Kakas, A. C., Miller, R., & Toni, F. (1999). An argumentation framework of reasoning
about actions and change. In International Conference on Logic Programming and
Nonmonotonic Reasoning - LPNMR 99, pp. 7891.
Kakas, A. C., Miller, R., & Toni, F. (2000). E-res - a system for reasoning about actions, events and observations. In Baral, C., & Truszczynski, M. (Eds.), International
Workshop on Non-Monotonic Reasoning, Special Session on System Descriptions and
Demonstration - NMR2000.
Kakas, A. C., Miller, R., & Toni, F. (2001). E-res: Reasoning about actions, events and
observations. In International Conference on Logic Programming and Nonmonotonic
Reasoning - LPNMR 01, pp. 254266.
Kautz, H. (1986). The logic of persistence. In National Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Kowalski, R., & Sergot, M. J. (1986). A logic-based calculus of events. New Generation
Computing, 4, 6795.
Kowalski, R. (1992). Database updates in the event calculus. Journal of Logic Programming,
12, 121146.
Kushmerick, N. (1996). Cognitivism and situated action: two views on intelligent agency.
Computers and Artificial Intelligence, 15(5).
Lifschitz, V. (1987). On the semantics of STRIPS. In Georgeff, & Lansky (Eds.), Reasoning
about Actions and Plans. Morgan Kauffman, Los Altos.
516

fiReasoning about Action: An Argumentation-Theoretic Approach

Lin, F. (1995). Embracing causality in specifying the indirect effects of actions. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Lin, F. (1996). Embracing causality in specifying the indeterminate effects of actions. In
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 670676.
Lin, F., & Reiter, R. (1994). State constraints revisited. Journal of Logic and Computation,
4(5), 655678.
Lin, F., & Shoham, Y. (1995). Provably correct theories of action. Journal of the ACM,
42(2), 293320.
McCain, N., & Turner, H. (1995). A causal theory of ramifications and qualifications. In
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
McCain, N., & Turner, H. (1997). Causal theories of action and change. In National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 460465.
McCarthy, J. (1977). Epistemological problems of artificial intelligence. In International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 555562.
McCarthy, J. (1980). Circumscription - a form of non-monotonic reasoning. Artificial
Intelligence Journal, 13(1-2), 2739.
McCarthy, J. (1986). Applications of circumscription to formalizing common sense knowledge. Artificial Intelligence Journal, 26(3), 89116.
McCarthy, J., & Hayes, P. (1969). Some philosophical problems from the standpoint of
artificial intelligence. In Michie, D., & Meltzer, B. (Eds.), Machine Intelligence 4.
Edinburgh University Press.
McDermott, D. V. (1987). Weve been framed: Or why ai is innocent of the frame problem. In Pylyshyn, Z. (Ed.), The Robots Dilemma: The Frame Problem in Artificial
Intelligence, pp. 113122. Ablex.
McDermott, D. V., & Doyle, J. (1980). Non-monotonic logic I. Artificial Intelligence
Journal, 13(1-2), 4172.
Moore, R. C. (1985). Semantical considerations on nonmonotonic logic. Artificial Intelligence Journal, 25(1), 7594.
Morris, P. H. (1988). The anomalous extension problem in default reasoning. Artificial
Intelligence Journal, 35(3), 383399.
Pednault, E. (1989). ADL: Exploring the middle ground between STRIPS and the situation calculus. In KR89: First International Conference on Principles of Knowledge
Representation and Reasoning, pp. 324332. Morgan Kaufmann.
Poole, D. (1988). A logical framework for default reasoning. Artificial Intelligence Journal,
36(1), 2747.
Reiter, R. (1980). A logic for default reasoning. Artificial Intelligence Journal, 13, 81132.
Reiter, R. (1991). The frame problem in the situation calculus: A simple solution (sometimes) and a completeness result for goal regression. In Lifschitz, V. (Ed.), AI and
Mathematical Theory of Computation: Papers in Honor of John McCarthy, pp. 418
420. Academic Press.
517

fiVo & Foo

Sandewall, E. (1994). Features and Fluents. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Schubert, L. (1990). Monotonic solution of the frame problem in the situation calculus; an
efficient method for worlds with fully specified actions. In Kyburg, H., Loui, R., &
Carlson, G. (Eds.), Knowledge Representation and Defeasible Reasoning, pp. 2367.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.
Shanahan, M. (1989). Prediction is deduction but explanation is abduction. In International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 10551060.
Shanahan, M. (1997). Solving the Frame Problem: A Mathematical Investigation of the
Common Sense Law of Inertia. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachussets.
Shanahan, M. (1999). The ramification problem in the event calculus. In International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 140146.
Shoham, Y. (1987). Reasoning about Change. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Shoham, Y. (1988). Chronological ignorance: Experiments in nonmonotonic temporal reasoning. Artificial Intelligence Journal, 36, 279331.
Stein, L. A., & Morgenstern, L. (1994). Motivated action theory: a formal theory of causal
reasoning. Artificial Intelligence Journal, 71(1), 142.
Thielscher, M. (1997). Ramification and causality. Artificial Intelligence Journal, 89, 317
364.
Thielscher, M. (1999). From situation calculus to fluent calculus: State update axioms as
a solution to the inferential frame problem. Artificial Intelligence Journal, 111(1-2),
277299.
Thielscher, M. (2001). The qualification problem: A solution to the problem of anomalous
models. Artificial Intelligence Journal, 131(1-2), 137.
Turner, H. (1997). Representing actions in logic programs and default theories: A situation
calculus approach. Journal of Logic Programming, 31(1-3), 245298.
Vo, Q. B., & Foo, N. Y. (2001). Solving the qualification problem. In Australian Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 519531.
Vo, Q. B., & Foo, N. Y. (2002). Solving the ramification problem: Causal propagation in
an argumentation-theoretic approach. In 7th Pacific Rim International Conference
on Artificial Intelligence - PRICAI2002, pp. 4959.
Zhang, D., & Foo, N. Y. (2002). Interpolation properties of action logic: Lazy-formalization
to the frame problem. In Flesca, S., Greco, S., Leone, N., & Ianni, G. (Eds.), Logics
in Artificial Intelligence, European Conference, JELIA 2002, pp. 357368.

518

fi