Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 35 (2009) 775-811

Submitted 03/09; published 08/09

Enhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal
Question Processing Capabilities
Estela Saquete
Jose L. Vicedo
Patricio Martnez-Barco
Rafael Munoz
Hector Llorens

stela@dlsi.ua.es
vicedo@dlsi.ua.es
patricio@dlsi.ua.es
rafael@dlsi.ua.es
hllorens@dlsi.ua.es

Natural Language Processing and Information System Group
Department of Software and Computing Systems
University of Alicante
Apartado de Correos 99, E-03080 Alicante, Spain

Abstract
This paper presents a multilayered architecture that enhances the capabilities of current
QA systems and allows different types of complex questions or queries to be processed.
The answers to these questions need to be gathered from factual information scattered
throughout different documents. Specifically, we designed a specialized layer to process the
different types of temporal questions. Complex temporal questions are first decomposed
into simple questions, according to the temporal relations expressed in the original question.
In the same way, the answers to the resulting simple questions are recomposed, fulfilling
the temporal restrictions of the original complex question. A novel aspect of this approach
resides in the decomposition which uses a minimal quantity of resources, with the final
aim of obtaining a portable platform that is easily extensible to other languages. In this
paper we also present a methodology for evaluation of the decomposition of the questions
as well as the ability of the implemented temporal layer to perform at a multilingual level.
The temporal layer was first performed for English, then evaluated and compared with:
a) a general purpose QA system (F-measure 65.47% for QA plus English temporal layer
vs. 38.01% for the general QA system), and b) a well-known QA system. Much better
results were obtained for temporal questions with the multilayered system. This system was
therefore extended to Spanish and very good results were again obtained in the evaluation
(F-measure 40.36% for QA plus Spanish temporal layer vs. 22.94% for the general QA
system).

1. Introduction
Nowadays, it is a fact that there is a huge amount of digital information available (mainly
in textual form) and also a large number of users who want the easiest possible access
to this information. This situation continuously fosters research on the development of
information systems that make it possible to analyze, locate, manage, access and process
all this information automatically. Commonly, these systems are referred to as search
engines.
A search engine is especially useful to obtain a specific piece of information without
the need to manually go through all the available documentation related to the search
topic. Search engines are currently evolving towards a new generation of engines capable of
c
2009
AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

fiSaquete, Vicedo, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Llorens

understanding user needs better (the necessity behind every query) and offering specific
services or interfaces, depending on the domain or context. The new generation of search
engines will be able to not only offer a list of ordered web pages, but also discover pieces of
information scattered throughout different information sources or even summaries (Barzilay,
Elhadad, & McKeown, 2002). That is, they will integrate information from text search (web
pages, documents), multimedia search (images, video, audio) and database search (tourist,
biomedicine, etc.) into comprehensible answers to be delivered to users. In addition, they
will correctly process questions formulated in free natural language as opposed to keyword
queries or fixed templates, as in information extraction scenarios (Michelson & Knoblock,
2008). Question answering systems (QA) are one of the best examples of this new generation
of search engines, allowing users to formulate questions in free natural language (NL) and
providing them with exactly the information required, also in NL form.
However, QA is not a mature technology and current systems are mainly focused on the
treatment of questions that require very specific items of data as an answer such as dates,
names of entities or quantities. What is the capital of Brazil? is an example of the so
called factual questions. In this case, the answer is the name of a city.
On the long road towards the next generation systems, the work presented here takes
a new step forward. It defines a layer that, installed on top of current NL-based search
engines or QA systems, enhances their capabilities of processing different types of complex
temporal questions.
The specific case of temporal QA is not a trivial task due to the potential complexity
of temporal questions. Current search engines, such as operational QA systems can deal
with simple factual temporal questions, that is, questions requiring a date as an answer
(When did Bob Marley die?) or questions that involve simple temporal expressions in
their formulation (Who won the U.S. Open in 1999?). Processing these kinds of questions
is usually accomplished by identifying explicit temporal expressions in questions and the
relevant documents that contain these temporal expressions in order to answer the questions.
However, the system described in this paper also processes complex temporal questions.
That is, questions whose complexity is related to the temporal properties of the entities
enquired about and the relative ordering of events mentioned in the question. The following
are examples of these complex temporal questions:
 Who was the spokesman of the Soviet Embassy in Baghdad during the invasion of
Kuwait?
 Is Bill Clinton currently the President of the United States?
The approach we present in this work tries to imitate the temporal reasoning of a human
when solving these types of questions. For example, a person trying to answer the question:
Who was the spokesman of the Soviet Embassy in Baghdad during the invasion of Kuwait?
would proceed as follows:
1. First, the complex question would be decomposed into two simple ones: Who was
the spokesman of the Soviet Embassy in Baghdad? and When did the invasion of
Kuwait occur?.
776

fiEnhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal Question Processing Capabilities

2. He/She would look for all the possible answers to the first simple question: Who was
spokesman of the Soviet Embassy in Baghdad?.
3. After that, he/she would look for the answer to the second question: When did the
invasion of Kuwait occur?
4. Finally, he/she would give as a final answer one of the answers for the first question (if
there is any) that have temporal compatibility with the answer to the second question.
In this case, the answer to the first question must be temporally compatible with the
period of dates associated with the invasion of Kuwait (during).
Therefore, a logical approach for the treatment of complex questions should be based on the
decomposition of these questions into simple ones that can be resolved using conventional
QA systems. Finally, answers to simple questions, fulfilling the temporal constraints, would
be used to construct the answer to the original complex question.
This study presents the development and evaluation of a tool that processes complex
NL-temporal questions for information retrieval purposes. Apart from the fact that the tool
is capable of processing this type of complex questions, it has the following advantages:
 It can be incorporated as a layer on top of one or more already existing QA systems.
 It can contain and integrate into an answer different data obtained from different types
of information sources (web pages, databases, documents, etc.) that are retrieved
using different types of search engines (QA, NLIDB1 , etc.).
 The layer is a portable platform since the language-dependent features of the process
are easily extended to other languages.
 All the information necessary to process the complex question is obtained directly
from it, no extra auxiliary questions or annotations are required.
In this paper, our main aim is to demonstrate how the temporal layer can improve
a general purpose QA system when questions are not simple or factual, but of a higher
degree of complexity. Specifically, we implemented the temporal layer in order to deal
with questions with different levels of temporal complexity. Furthermore, the proposed
treatment of questions uses a minimum quantity of linguistic resources in order to obtain a
very portable platform, which can be easily extended to different languages.
The paper has been structured in the following way: first of all, section 2 briefly introduces the current situation of temporal reasoning and QA; section 3 depicts our proposal
for classifying temporal questions into four groups, depending on the features of the question; section 4 explains the concept of a Multilayered QA system; section 5 describes the
different modules of the temporal layer in more detail; and in section 6, decomposition of
the question and the Multilayered QA system are evaluated for English. The portability of
the system to other languages is then described, and the procedure repeated and evaluated
for Spanish. Finally, some conclusions and comments on future work will be made.
1. Natural Language Interfaces to Databases

777

fiSaquete, Vicedo, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Llorens

2. Background
As explained in the introduction, one of the aims of this paper is to process complex questions. Complex questions in general have been dealt with in previous studies using different
approaches to decompose them. Harabagiu, Lacatusu and Hickl (2006) presented a procedure in which a question produces lots of queries that are semantically related to the original
question, with the main aim of obtaining more information about the answers. This approach requires a significant amount of semantic information. The question decomposition
presented by Katz, Borchardt and Felshin (2005) involves three decomposition techniques:
a) a syntactic decomposition using linguistic knowledge and language-based descriptions
of resource content, b) a semantic decomposition using domain-motivated explanation patterns and language-based annotations of resource content, and c) a semantic decomposition
of both questions and resource content into lower-level assertions. This approach makes use
of a considerable amount of linguistic knowledge and in order to move to new domains, new
sets of parameterized language-based annotations need to be composed. In addition to these
studies dealing with single focus complex questions, Lin and Lui (2008) propose processing
complex questions with multiple foci by obtaining one subquestion for each focus of the
original question. This approach determines four possible relations between the subquestions derived from the original question. However, the temporal relation is not considered
in this approach.
Apart from complex questions treatment, the motivation for the temporal aspect of this
work is due to the great importance in the question answering field of relating questions
and information to the temporal dimension in order to find a correct answer. Take, for
example, the following two similar questions:
 Who is the president of the USA?
 Who was the president of the USA in 1975?
There is an obvious dependency of answers on time, so in order to obtain the right answer
to these two questions, temporal information needs to be extracted and processed, because
the first question refers to the current president of the USA (the exact point in time when
the question is formulated), whereas the second one refers to the president in 1975. When
the temporal information is not explicit, the questions are considered complex temporal
questions.
The importance of the temporal dimension of data in information search processes is
corroborated by the recent interest shown by the major evaluation forums on QA like Text
REtrieval Conference - TREC (2008) and Cross Language Evaluation Forum - CLEF (2008),
see also the works by Voorhees (2002) and Magnini et al. (2005), in including different types
of temporal questions as part of their evaluation benchmarks.
Furthermore, CLEF has explicitly fostered research into complex temporal questions by
organizing a specific pilot task for such questions (Herrera, Penas, & Verdejo, 2005) and
including in CLEF (Magnini et al., 2006) the temporal dimension of questions and answers
as part of its main QA task.
A temporal question can be appropriately processed by: (1) relating the available information to its temporal dimension and (2) adapting the search to link this temporal
information with the information search process.
778

fiEnhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal Question Processing Capabilities

Concerning the first task, the analysis of time is a challenging problem, as the needs of
applications based on information extraction techniques expand to include varying degrees
of time stamping (identification and reasoning) of events or expressions within a narrative
or question. Interest in temporal representation and reasoning has been evolving throughout the years and has resulted in a growing number of meetings related to this topic. We
present here, in descending chronological order, the most important ones: TIME (2008) is
an annual symposium on Temporal Representation and Reasoning (Demri & Jensen, 2008),
it involves different areas including Time in Natural Language; TempEval 2007 (Verhagen
et al., 2007) is a workshop held within SemEval-2007 for the evaluation of systems performing Time-Event Temporal Relation Identification; ARTE 2006 is a new workshop focused on
Annotating and Reasoning about Time and Events (Ahn, 2006; Dalli & Wilks, 2006; Mani &
Wellner, 2006) and was part of the relevant conference COLING-ACL (2006) (Pan, Mulkar,
& Hobbs, 2006a); Dagstuhl 2005 was a seminar about annotating, extracting and reasoning
time and events (Katz, Pustejovsky, & Schilder, 2005); TERN (2004) was an international
competition in which different systems that identify and normalize temporal expressions
were evaluated and compared; TANGO 2003 was specialized in developing an appropriate infrastructure for annotation (Pustejovsky & Mani, 2008); LREC (2002) dedicated a
workshop to Annotation Standards for Temporal Information in Natural Language (Mani
& Wilson, 2002; Setzer & Gaizauskas, 2002; Saquete, Martnez-Barco, & Munoz, 2002);
ACL (2001) included the Temporal and Spatial Information Processing workshop (Setzer &
Gaizauskas, 2001; Filatova & Hovy, 2001; Katz & Arosio, 2001; Moia, 2001; Schilder & Habel, 2001; Wilson, Mani, Sundheim, & Ferro, 2001) and finally, COLING (2000), in which
some papers were related to temporal expression identification or temporal databases. It
is important to emphasize that all these meetings led to the development of a standard for
a specification language for events and temporal expressions and their ordering (TimeML,
2008). Nowadays, there is also a growing number of automatic systems extracting temporal
expression information2 , such as: ATEL (2008), Chronos (Negri, 2007), TempEx (2008),
GUTime (Mani & Wilson, 2000a), DANTE (Mazur & Dale, 2007), TimexTag (Ahn, 2006)
and TERSEO (Saquete, Munoz, & Martnez-Barco, 2006).
Regarding the second task, significant progress has been made in temporal analysis applied to IE and QA tasks as presented in the TERQAS workshop (Pustejovsky, 2002; Radev
& Sundheim, 2002). The purpose of the TERQAS workshop was to address the problem of
how to enhance natural language question answering systems to answer temporally-based
questions about the events and entities in news articles. Besides, a temporal question corpus
was developed. As far as we know, one of the first systems that treated temporal information for QA purposes was described by Breck et al. (2000) and it used temporal expression
identification applying the temporal tagger developed by Mani and Wilson (2000b). Another important study related to temporal constraints in question answering is presented by
Prager, Chu-Carroll and Czuba (2004). They presented a method to improve the accuracy
of a QA system by asking auxiliary questions related to the original question whose answers are used to temporally verify and restrict the original answer. This method is called
QA-by-Dossier with Constraints and is very suitable for TREC-style factoid questions, but
it has the inconvenience of requiring the generation of a set of auxiliary questions. Besides,
2. http://timexportal.wikidot.com/systems

779

fiSaquete, Vicedo, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Llorens

recently, researchers have also focused on other important features in temporal reasoning
for final applications, such as: a) event detection: Evita (Saur, Knippen, Verhagen, &
Pustejovsky, 2005) is an application for recognizing events in natural language texts, and
this recognition is applied to QA, b) event extension: Pan, Mulkar and Hobbs (2006b) describe a method to automatically learn durations from event descriptions, and c) temporal
relations between temporal expressions and events, as described by Lapata and Lascarides
(2006).
However, those strategies that implied a complex temporal processing of the question,
using only information extracted from the original question and a small amount of linguistic
resources for the temporal reasoning were beyond the scope of these investigations.
Our proposal is focused on temporal reasoning for complex temporal questions and so it
is necessary to add a new layer to existing systems, thereby allowing these complex questions
to be processed (Saquete, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Vicedo, 2004). The decomposition
performed by the temporal layer is based only on the temporal relation between the events
of the original question, and no other linguistic information is required in the decomposition.
In addition, a system that identifies and normalizes temporal expressions was used as a part
of the processing layer (Negri, Saquete, Martnez-Barco, & Munoz, 2006), taking advantage
of the multilingual feature of this system in order to use it for cross-lingual tasks.
However, not all the temporal questions need to be treated in the same way since they
may have different characteristics, and for this reason, a classification of the different types
of temporal questions is also proposed.

3. Temporal Questions Taxonomy
Before explaining how to answer temporal questions, they must be classified into different
categories since the way to solve them will differ depending on the type of question involved.
The temporality of a question depends on two levels of complexity: a) the number of events
in the question: Questions formed by a single event and whose answers can be found in
a document (simple questions), and questions formed by more than one event that are
temporally related and whose answers could be found in multiple documents (complex
questions), and b) the temporal information appearing in the question, like implicit or
explicit temporal expressions, that needs to be recognized and normalized. The combination
of these two features results in four different types of temporal questions.
Simple Temporal Questions:
Type 1: Single event temporal questions without a temporal expression (TE). These are
questions that require a temporal expression as an answer and do not contain any temporal
expression in their formulation. These questions are formed by a single event and no
temporal reasoning is required, because they are resolved by a QA system directly without
a pre or postprocessing of the question. For example: When did Jordan close the port of
Aqaba to Kuwait?. However, since this taxonomy is a temporal question taxonomy, this
type of basic temporal questions need to be considered.
Type 2: Single event temporal questions with a temporal expression. These are questions
that require a temporal reasoning of the temporal expression contained in the formulation
of the question. There is a single event in the question, but there are one or more temporal
expressions that need to be identified, normalized and annotated. All this temporal infor780

fiEnhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal Question Processing Capabilities

mation is necessary to search for the correct answer, due to the fact that it is establishing
temporal constraints for the candidate answers. For example: Who won the 1988 New
Hampshire Republican primary?. Temporal Expression: 1988
Complex Temporal Questions:
Type 3: Multiple event temporal questions with a temporal expression. Questions that
contain more than one event, related by a temporal signal. This signal establishes the order
between the events in the question. Moreover, there are one or more temporal expressions in
the question. These temporal expressions need to be identified, normalized and annotated,
and they establish temporal constraints in the answers to the question. For example: What
did George Bush do after the U.N. Security Council ordered a global embargo on trade with
Iraq in August 90? In this example, the temporal signal is after and the temporal
constraint is between 8/1/1990 and 8/31/1990. This question consists of these two events:
 Event 1: George Bush did something
 Event 2: the U.N. Security Council ordered a global embargo on trade with Iraq
(Temporal constraint: August 1990)
Type 4: Multiple event temporal questions without a temporal expression. Like Type 3,
these questions consist of more than one event, related by a temporal signal, but in this
case, the questions do not contain temporal expressions. The temporal signal establishes
the order between the events in the question. For example: Who was the president of
US when the AARP was founded?. In this example, the temporal signal is when and the
question would be decomposed into:
 Event 1: someone was the president of US
 Event 2: the AARP foundation
How to process each type of question will be explained in detail in the following sections.

4. Architecture of a Multilayered QA System
In order to process special types of questions which are beyond the scope of currently QA
systems, this work proposes a multilayered architecture that increases the functionality of
these QA systems, allowing them to solve any type of complex question. In this work, the
temporal layer has been implemented. Moreover, this architecture enables different layers
to be added to cope with questions that need other kinds of complex processing and are
not temporally oriented, such as script questions (How do I assemble a bicycle?) or
template-based questions (What is the main biographical data of Nelson Mandela?).
Complex questions have in common the need for additional processing of the question
in order to solve it adequately. The architecture presented in this paper enables different
types of complex questions to be dealt with by superposing additional processing layers,
one for each type, on the top of an existing general purpose QA system, as shown in Figure
1. These layers will:
 decompose the question into simple events to generate simple questions (sub-questions)
that are ordered according to the original question,
781

fiSaquete, Vicedo, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Llorens

 send simple questions to a general purpose QA system,
 receive the answers to the simple questions from the general purpose QA system,
 filter, compare and validate the sub-answers, according to the relation detected between sub-questions, in order to construct the final complex answer.

Complex Question

Complex Answer

INTERFACE
TEMPORAL
QUESTION
LAYER

SCRIPT
QUESTION
LAYER

TEMPLATE
QUESTION
LAYER

Simple Questions

...

Simple Answers
SEARCH ENGINE

Text

Multimedia

Databases

Figure 1: Multi-layered Architecture of a QA system
This architecture has a large number of advantages, of which the following should be
mentioned:
 It allows researchers to use any existing general purpose QA system.
 Since complex questions are processed by a superior layer, it is not necessary to modify
the current QA system when you want to deal with more complex questions. The layer
enhances the capabilities of an existing QA system without changing it in any way.
 Each additional processing layer works independently from the others and only processes the questions accepted by that layer.
 It is possible to have more than one type of QA system working in parallel, each of
them specialized in searching for a specific type of information (text,multimedia,databases).
Next, a layer oriented to processing temporal questions according to the taxonomy shown
in section 3 is presented.
782

fiEnhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal Question Processing Capabilities

5. Temporal Layer
The temporal layer proposed here consists of two units, the Question Decomposition Unit
and the Answer Recomposition Unit, which will be superposed over a general purpose QA
system, as shown in Figure 2.
Complex
Question

Complex
Answer
INTERFACE
TEMPORAL LAYER

QUESTION
DECOMPOSITION UNIT

ANSWER
RECOMPOSITION UNIT

TE
tags

TE Identification and
Normalization

Individual Answer
Filtering

Type Identification
Answer Comparison
and Composition

Signal
Question Splitter

Q-Focus

Q-Restriction

Q-Focus
Answers

Q-Rest.
Answer

SEARCH ENGINE

Text

Multimedia

Databases

Figure 2: Architecture of the temporal layer
These components all work together in order to obtain a final answer as follows:
 Question Decomposition Unit is a preprocessing unit which performs three main tasks.
First of all, temporal expressions in the question are identified and normalized. Secondly, following the taxonomy shown in section 3, there are different types of questions
and each type must be treated in a different way. For this reason, the type needs to
be identified. After that, complex questions (Type 3 and 4) are split into simple
ones using the temporal signal as a reference. The first sub-question is defined as the
question focus (Q-Focus) and it specifies the type of information the user needs to
find. The second sub-question is called the question restriction (Q-Restriction) and
the answer to this sub-question establishes the temporal restrictions on the list of
answers to the Q-Focus. The Q-Focus and the Q-Restriction are the input of the QA
system. For example, the question Where did Bill Clinton study before going to Oxford University?, is divided into two sub-questions that are related by the temporal
signal before: Q-Focus: Where did Bill Clinton study? and Q-Restriction:When
did Bill Clinton go to Oxford University?.
783

fiSaquete, Vicedo, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Llorens

 General purpose QA system. The simple questions generated are processed by a general purpose QA system. Any QA system could be used here (QA systems, Multimedia
search engines or NLIDB). For the example above, a current QA system returns the
following answers:
 Q-Focus Answers:
 Georgetown University (1964-68)
 Oxford University (1968-70)
 Yale Law School (1970-73)
 Q-Restriction Answer: 1968
 Answer Recomposition Unit. This unit constructs the answer to the original question from the answers to the Q-Focus and the Q-Restriction using all the temporal
constraints, such as temporal signals (which are fully explained later) or temporal
expressions, available in the original question. The temporal signal establishes the
appropriate order between the answers to the Q-Focus and the Q-Restriction in the
question. Finally, this unit returns the appropriate answer by analyzing the temporal compatibility between the list of possible Q-Focus answers and the Q-Restriction
answer.
An example of how the temporal layer operates is shown in Figure 3.
Where did Bill Clinton study before going to Oxford University?
Q-Focus

Q-Restriction

Where did Bill Clinton study?

When did Bill Clinton go to
Oxford University?

ANSWERS:
Georgetown University
(1964-1968)
 Oxford University
(1968-1970)
 Yale Law School
(1970-1973)

ANSWER:

Temporal
Signal

1968-1970

<

Temporal Compatible
Answer
Georgetown University

Figure 3: Example of performance of the Temporal Layer
It is important to emphasize that the temporal layer is a language dependent platform
(it uses lexical and syntactic patterns) and English was the language chosen initially to
develop the layer; however, it can be easily extended to other languages, as will be seen in
section 6.3. The units that integrate the temporal layer are described in more detail in the
following sections.
784

fiEnhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal Question Processing Capabilities

5.1 Question Decomposition Unit
The main task of this unit, which is divided into three main modules, is the temporal
reasoning of the temporal information of the question and the decomposition of the question
(only required in Type 3 and 4 questions). The temporal expression identification and
normalization module detects and resolves the temporal expressions in the question. The
type identification module classifies the question according to the taxonomy proposed in
section 3. Finally, the question splitter module splits the complex question into simple
ones.
Thus, the output of the Question Decomposition unit consists of:
 two sub-questions (Q-Focus and Q-Restriction), which will be processed by a QA
system in order to obtain an answer for each of them,
 temporal tags, containing concrete dates returned by the TERSEO system (Saquete
et al., 2006), these tags are part of the input of the Answer Recomposition Unit and
they are used by this unit as temporal constraints in order to filter the individual
answers, and
 the temporal signal, which is part of the input of the Answer Recomposition Unit
as well, because this information is needed in order to compose the final answer and
determine the temporal compatibility between the answers to the Q-Focus and the
answer to the Q-Restriction.
The modules of the decomposition unit are fully explained in the following subsections.
5.1.1 Temporal Expression Identification and Normalization
This module uses the TERSEO system (Saquete et al., 2006) to identify, annotate and
normalize temporal expressions in the question.
With this system, implicit and explicit temporal expressions can be annotated. Expressions like 12/06/1975 are explicit, while those like two days before are implicit and
need the location of another complete temporal expression (TE) to be understood. For the
specific purposes of the temporal layer, TERSEO simply returns the text of the temporal
expression in a string and the normalization or resolution value of the temporal expression
using the ISO standard format for concrete dates or periods.
In this work, TERSEO does not use a complete text as input, but only a question. The
temporal tags (TE tag with a value attribute) obtained from the questions are the output
of this module and they are used in the Answer Recomposition Unit in order to filter
the individual answers obtained by the QA system. The TE tag is necessary in order to
determine the temporal compatibility between the answers to the Q-Focus and the answer
to the Q-Restriction. For example, in a question like: Which U.S. ship was attacked by
Israeli forces during the Six Day war in the sixties?, the temporal constraint that must be
fulfilled is: the date of Q-Focus answers should be between 1960-01-01 and 1969-12-31 
(196 in ISO format). This means that only the answers whose dates are within the range
of dates in the question are temporally compatible.
It is very important to emphasize that, initially, the TERSEO was developed for Spanish,
but a platform to automatically extend the system to other languages was developed as
785

fiSaquete, Vicedo, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Llorens

well. Therefore, the system was evaluated for three different languages: Spanish, English
and Italian. For Spanish the results were 91% precision and 73% recall. The system was
evaluated for English using the TERN (2004) corpus and the results obtained for the Fmeasure were 86% for identification and about 65% for normalization. For the Italian
evaluation, the I-CAB corpus was used. This corpus consists of 525 news documents taken
from the local newspaper LAdige 3 . Ita-TERSEO obtained an F-measure of around 77%
for identification. The results are quite good because the extension to English and Italian
was completely automatic and therefore, also very fast.
The multilingual capabilities of TERSEO are very interesting in various NLP fields, in
particular its application to Crosslingual QA systems, and therefore in the Temporal Layer
as well.
5.1.2 Type Identification
The Type Identification module classifies the question into one of the four types in the
taxonomy proposed above. This identification is necessary because each type of question
produces a different behavior (scenario) in the system. Type 1 and Type 2 questions are
classified as simple, and the answer can be obtained without splitting the original question.
On the other hand, Type 3 and Type 4 questions need to be split into a set of simple
sub-questions. These types of sub-questions are always Type 1, Type 2 or a non-temporal
question, which are considered simple questions.
The question type is established according to the rules in Figure 4. There are four
possibilities: (a) if there is no Temporal Expression and no Temporal Signal, the question
is classified as Type 1 ; (b) if there is no Temporal Expression but a Temporal Signal, the
question is classified as Type 4 ; (c) if there is a Temporal Expression but no Temporal
Signal, the question is classified as Type 2 ; (d) if there is a Temporal Expression and a
Temporal signal, the question is classified as Type 3.
5.1.3 Question Splitter
This task is only necessary when, according to the type identification module, the question
is Type 3 or Type 4. These questions are considered complex questions and need to be
divided into simple ones (Type 1, Type 2 or non-temporal questions). The decomposition
of a complex question is based on the identification of temporal signals, which link simple
events to form complex questions (see Table 1).
As explained before, using the temporal signal as a referent, the two events related by
it will be transformed into two simple questions: Question-Focus (Q-Focus) and QuestionRestriction (Q-Restriction).
The Q-Focus is a question that specifies the information that the user is searching
for. This question is very simple to obtain, because no syntactic changes are required to
construct it, only the question mark must be added. When the Q-Focus is processed by a
QA system, the system will return a list of possible answers.
The Q-Restriction is constructed using the part of the complex question that follows
the temporal signal. This question is always transformed to a When question using a set
3. http://www.adige.it

786

fiEnhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal Question Processing Capabilities

QUESTION
(Q)

QUESTION
ANALYSIS

NO

NO

YES

TEMPORAL
EXPRESSION?

YES

NO

TEMPORAL
SIGNAL?

TYPE 1

YES
TEMPORAL
SIGNAL?

TYPE 4

TYPE 2

TYPE 3

Figure 4: Decision tree for Type Identification
of lexical and syntactic patterns defined in the layer. When the Q-Restriction is processed
by a QA system, only one appropriate answer is expected.
In addition, temporal signals denote an ordering between the events being linked. Assuming that F1 is the date associated with the answers to the Q-Focus and F2 is the date
associated with the answer to the Q-Restriction4 , the signal will establish a certain order
between the answers, which is called the ordering key. An example of some ordering keys
are shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Example of signals and ordering keys
SIGNAL
After
When
Before
During
From F2 to F3
About F2  F3
On / in
While
For
At the time of
Since

ORDERING KEY
F1 > F2
F1 = F2
F1 < F2
F2i <= F1 <= F2f
F2 <= F1 <= F3
F2 <= F1 <= F3
F1 = F2
F2i <= F1 <= F2f
F2i <= F1 <= F2f
F1 = F2
F1 > F2

Using the list of answers to the Q-Focus, the answer to the Q-Restriction and the
temporal signal, the Answer Recomposition Unit determines the temporal compatibility
4. F2:Q-Restriction concrete date / [F2i-F2f]:Q-Restriction period dates

787

fiSaquete, Vicedo, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Llorens

between the answers and composes the final answer to the original complex question. This
process will be fully explained in the following subsection.
5.2 Answer Recomposition Unit
The main task of the Answer Recomposition Unit is to obtain the final answer to the
complex question using all the available inputs of the Decomposition Unit and the answers
obtained from the QA system. The Recomposition Unit is divided into two modules. The
Individual Answer Filtering module filters the possible answers to the Q-Focus, avoiding
the non-temporally compatible ones, and the Answer Comparison and Composition module,
which composes the answer to the original question by using the ordering key established
by the temporal signal.
Once the complex questions have been split by the Decomposition Unit into the Q-Focus
and the Q-Restriction and the answers to these questions have been obtained by a QA
system, the Recomposition Unit determines from the list of all the potential answers to the
Q-Focus which one is compatible with all the temporal constraints obtained in the process:
temporal expressions, temporal signal and answer to the Q-Restriction. The answers to the
Q-Focus that fulfill the temporal constraints will be considered the answer to the initial
complex question.
5.2.1 Individual Answer Filtering
The list of possible answers to the Q-Focus and the answer to the Q-Restriction given by
the QA system are the input of the Individual Answer Filtering module. For a Q-Focus
or Q-Restriction with a temporal expression, it selects only those answers that satisfy the
temporal constraints obtained by the TE Identification and Normalization Unit. The date
of the answer should be temporally compatible with the temporal tag, that is, the date of
the answer must lie within the date values of the tag. If not, it will be rejected. Only the
answers that fulfill the constraints go to the Answer Comparison and Composition module.
5.2.2 Answer Comparison and Composition
Finally, once the answers have been filtered using the signals and the ordering key, the
results for the Q-Focus are compared with the answer to the Q-Restriction in order to
determine if they are temporally compatible. Temporal signals denote the relationship of
order between the date of the answer to the Q-Focus and the date of the answer to the
Q-Restriction.
Only the answers that fulfill the compatibility established by the temporal signal can be
possible answers to the original question. The answer selected is considered by this module
to be the answer to the complex question. Hence, the system is able to solve complex
temporal questions.

6. Evaluation Experiments
The evaluation experiments performed in this paper were done initially for English, and
after porting the system to Spanish, the same evaluation procedure was carried out for this
new language.
788

fiEnhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal Question Processing Capabilities

This evaluation has a dual aim: on the one hand, to determine if the Decomposition
Unit is able to process each type of question properly in order to obtain appropriate simple
factual questions that can be answered by any kind of general purpose QA system, and on
the other hand, to show to what extent the general purpose QA system could be improved
when these techniques are applied.
6.1 Test Environment
First of all, a corpus of English questions that contains as many simple and complex temporal questions as possible was necessary. The first idea was to use already existing resources,
such as TREC (2008) and CLEF (2008) question corpora, due to the large number of
questions they contain. Unfortunately, after studying these corpora, they were discarded
because they do not contain complex temporal questions. Thus, using the initial TERQAS
question corpus proposal (Radev & Sundheim, 2002; Pustejovsky, 2002) as a model, a new
question corpus was manually developed collecting questions from a group of volunteers
unacquainted with this work. The instructions given to the volunteers were: 1) answers to
the questions proposed must be found on the Internet, 2) the questions must be constructed
according to the temporal question taxonomy described in Section 3, and 3) the questions
must expect a fact as an answer (factual questions). In the case of complex questions, two
factual questions must be related to a temporal signal5 . This last instruction was necessary
in order to make the evaluation procedure more straightforward since open-ended questions
usually require long answers, which makes them more difficult to judge. In order to have
a balanced corpus, some questions were discarded and finally the corpus developed contains a balanced number (50) of each type of temporal question (Types 1,2,3 and 4), which
resulted in 200 temporal questions for English6 . For the Spanish evaluation, the English
question corpus was manually translated into this language. Therefore, the distribution of
the questions by type is the same as in English.
Once the question corpus for English and Spanish were developed, the following step
was to construct the testbeds for both languages in order to allow for rigorous, transparent
and replicable evaluation tests. The testbed annotation was performed using an XML
schema and was developed by three independent annotators. In the case of doubts or
disagreement, the annotation was reviewed by a referee, who made the final decision. The
interannotator agreement was calculated for every attribute, resulting 100% for all cases
except the temporal signal (98%) due to the complexity of some temporal signals.
In the testbed annotation, every question is annotated with a Q tag, and this tag has
an id attribute that identifies every question. The question string is annotated using the
QUESTION tag. Furthermore, for every question, there are five items that must be annotated:
1. Identification and Normalization of the temporal expressions in the question. The
annotation for this item is done using a TE tag, and its content stores the string text
of the TE. The tag also has an attribute value, which stores the resolution of the
expression using the ISO format,
5. It is important to emphasize that Type 3 questions contain two events and a temporal expression, which
is used as an extra time constraint in the answering procedure, limiting the number of potential answers,
speeding the answering step, and refining the final answer
6. http://gplsi.dlsi.ua.es/corpus/CTQ

789

fiSaquete, Vicedo, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Llorens

2. the type of question according to the classification proposed in this paper. This type
is annotated using the tag TYPE and it must be a value between 1 and 4. Since the
questions were manually built using the temporal question taxonomy as a reference,
3. the temporal signal. The tag used to annotate this item is called SIGNAL and it stores
the exact string text of the temporal signal of the question,
4. the two possible sub-questions in the case of complex questions (Type 3 and 4): the
first sub-question is annotated using the tag Q-FOCUS and the second using the tag
Q-REST, and,
5. the answer to the complex question: the answer is annotated using an ANSWER tag and
contains the correct answer to the complex question. One example of the annotation
format for a question is:
<Q id="107">
<QUESTION>Who won the best actress Oscar award when James Dean died in the 50s?< /QUESTION>
<TE value="195">the 50s< /TE>
<TYPE>3< /TYPE>
<SIGNAL>when< /SIGNAL>
<Q-FOCUS>Who won the best actress Oscar award?< /Q-FOCUS>
<Q-REST>When did James Dean die in the 1950s?< /Q-REST>
<ANSWER>Anna Magnani< /ANSWER>
< /Q>

In the case of the Decomposition Unit, the following five aspects are evaluated:
 TE Identification and Normalization: are the temporal expressions in the question
correctly detected and normalized?
 Type Identification: is the type of question correctly identified according to the classification presented previously in this paper?
 Signal Detection: are any temporal signals in the question correctly detected?
 Question Splitter: are the complex questions correctly split into simple factual questions, which can be answered by a general purpose QA system?
 DECOMPOSITION UNIT as a whole: has the system correctly undertaken all the
sub-tasks previously defined, since these sub-tasks as a whole compose the decomposition unit?
However, not all the evaluation aspects explained above need to be considered for all the
questions. Table 2 determines if an aspect must be evaluated or ignored for each particular
type of question. The decomposition unit as a whole is only taking into consideration the
evaluated sub-tasks for every question.
Having determined what aspects are evaluated in the decomposition and in what cases
they must be evaluated, depending on the type of question, the next step is to establish
how these aspects are evaluated. For this purpose, the criteria matrix, containing the rules
followed in the evaluation in order to determine when the elements are treated (ACT) and
which of them are correct (CORR), is shown in Table 3.
790

fiEnhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal Question Processing Capabilities

Table 2: Aspects evaluated for Decomposition Unit depending on the Q-type
Type
1
2
3
4

TE Id.Norm.

Yes
Yes


Type
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Signal


Yes
Yes

Q Splitter


Yes
Yes

DECOMP.
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Table 3: ACT and CORR criteria matrix for Decomposition Unit evaluation
TE
Ident.Norm.

ACT
The TE is annotated by the system

Type
Signal
Q Splitter

The type is returned by the system
The temporal signal is annotated by the system
Complex Q is divided into two sub-Qs

DECOMP.

All previous aspects ACT

CORR
-Exact agreement with TE tag content
-Exact agreement with value attribute content
within TE tag
Exact agreement with TYPE tag content
Exact agreement with SIGNAL tag content
Sub-Qs agreement of Q-FOCUS and Q-REST tag
in:
-Interrogative particle
-Main verb correctly detected and tensed
-All keywords appear and only keywords from
the original Q, except stopwords
All previous aspect CORR

In the case of QA evaluation, we are using the current CLEF evaluation criteria7
as starting point, determining correct and inexact answers. The use of these evaluation
criteria is possible since our corpus only contains factual questions. Therefore, determining
the correctness of an answer is very straightforward. The other CLEF judgments are not
specified in this evaluation because the measure of incorrectness may be calculated directly
by subtracting the number of correct answers from the total number of questions. In
addition, the unknown judgement is also omitted since two human assessors must evaluate
all the answers. And finally, we do not consider unsupported judgement neither, since our
corpus consisted of data obtained from the Internet, where all correct answers can be found.
The criteria matrix for QA, shown in Table 4, describes the rules followed in the evaluation in order to determine treated (ACT), correct (CORR) and inexact (INE) answers.
Table 4: ACT and CORR criteria matrix for QA system
QA

ACT
An anwer is returned by
the system

CORR (CLEF R)
-Exact agreement with one
of the answers contained in
ANSWER tag content

INE (CLEF X)
The answer contains a correct answer, but it is incomplete or longer
than the minimum amount of information required

For all the evaluations performed in this work, the following measures were used:
 POS:Total number of items
7. http://www.clef-campaign.org/

791

fiSaquete, Vicedo, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Llorens

 ACT: Number of items treated by the system
 CORR: Number of items properly treated (Correct)(CLEF R)
 PREC: Precision ( CORR
ACT ) percentage of items in the output of the system that are
properly treated
 REC: Recall ( CORR
P OS ) percentage of items treated by the system (CLEF Accuracy)
2

)(P R)
) Combination of precision and recall in a single value.  = 1
 F: ( (1+
( 2 P +R)

 Only for QA evaluation purposes:
1
 MRR: For an ordered list of possible answers of a question is ( CorrectAnswerP
osition ).
The final MRR is the average of every individual MRR obtained.

 INE: Is the number of answers judged inexact by human assessors (CLEF X).
6.2 Evaluation Results
This section presents the results of the decomposition unit and an analysis of its influence
in QA systems for English.
6.2.1 Evaluating the Decomposition Unit for English
In this section, the decomposition unit8 for the processing of simple and complex temporal
questions in English is evaluated, based on the testbed defined previously. In this evaluation,
in addition to the decomposition unit efficiency, some aspects of temporal expressions and
their influence on complex questions were analyzed.
The evaluation results are very good with an F-measure of 89.5%. All the results
are shown in Table 5. In the evaluation, 176 of a total of 200 questions were correctly
preprocessed. Since the decomposition unit not only divides the complex questions but also
determines the type of the question and performs the temporal reasoning if necessary, the
whole set of questions is considered in the global measure of the decomposition unit. It is
obvious that in the case of Type 1 questions the decomposition unit simply determines the
type of question, but we were interested in evaluating the performance of the unit in this
respect.
Table 5: Evaluation of the decomposition unit for English
POS

ACT

CORR

PREC

REC

F

TE Identification and Normalization

100

93

80

86.0%

80.0%

82.9%

Type Identification

200

200

194

97.0%

97.0%

97.0%

Signal Detection

100

100

96

96.0%

96.0%

96.0%

Question Splitter

100

100

92

92.0%

92.0%

92.0%

200

193

176

91.1%

88.0%

89.5%

DECOMPOSITION UNIT

8. http://gplsi.dlsi.ua.es/demos/TQA/

792

fiEnhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal Question Processing Capabilities

Next, a detailed analysis of the results for each evaluation aspect is shown (see Appendix
A for detailed error examples):
 Identification and normalization of Temporal Expressions: In this corpus, there were
100 temporal expressions and our system detected 93, of which 80 were correctly
resolved. As we said previously, this module uses the TERSEO system to identify
and normalize the temporal expressions in the question. There were three types of
errors: (1) expressions that were treated by TERSEO as temporal expressions but
were not in fact temporal; (2) expressions that were identified wrongly because: a)
the expression is outside the scope of the TERSEO system, or b) the identification
extent is not exact; and (3) expressions that: a) were normalized wrongly because the
normalization rule in TERSEO was not appropriate for these expressions, or b) were
not normalized because the normalization rule does not exist.
 Type Identification: There were 200 temporal questions in the corpus, all of them were
processed by this module, and 194 were correctly identified according to the taxonomy
proposed in section 3. The errors in this module were due to the fact that some TE
were not detected by TERSEO, as shown in Appendix A. However, this type of error
does not usually affect the question splitting and in most cases the complex question
is split correctly.
 Signal Detection: In the corpus, there were 100 questions that were considered complex (Type 3 and Type 4). Our system was able to treat and recognize correctly the
temporal signal of 96 of these questions. The main error detected in this module arose
when a temporal expression was part of a signal, denoting a complex signal, such as:
EVENT1 a year after EVENT2. This type of complex signal is outside the scope
of the system. The system also fails when a preposition, classified as a signal in the
system, is part of a TE, like during the 18 century and therefore during is wrongly
considered a temporal signal.
 Question Splitter: From this set of 100 complex questions, the system was able
to process and split 92 of them properly. The errors in this unit are due to: a)
wrong signal identification; or b) syntactic problems, obtaining a tensed verb or the
subject of the Q-Focus to construct the Q-Restriction properly. For instance, in the
question Which language was invented when Berliner patented the Gramophone?,
the POSTagger did not identify patented as a past tense verb and the Q-Restriction
was wrongly generated as: When did Berliner patented the Gramophone happen?.
One possible problem that can appear in complex questions, and is not yet treated by
our system, are questions that contain anaphoric co-references. Therefore, when splitting
the complex question into two separate simple questions, the question that contains the
anaphoric co-reference can not be treated directly by a QA system and needs to be processed
by a module that performs anaphora resolution first. For example: In which studies did
Ms. Whitman graduate before she got her MBA? . The Q-Restriction obtained is: When
did she get her MBA?. In this case, she is referring to Ms. Whitman. In our case,
this type of question is outside our scope. However, just by adding a module that adapts
anaphora resolution techniques for dialogs and texts (Palomar et al., 2001; Palomar &
793

fiSaquete, Vicedo, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Llorens

Martnez-Barco, 2001) to questions, the situation will be solved. Moreover, applying this
module to the question does not affect the decomposition process in any case.
6.2.2 Evaluating the influence of the temporal processing in QA systems
for English
The QA system used for this evaluation is a general purpose one that uses Internet data
as the corpus (Moreda, Llorens, Saquete, & Palomar, 2008a). This is a very simple opendomain QA system, whose main feature is that the Answer Extraction Unit is able to look
for possible answers in two ways: performing a mapping with the type of name entity that
the question requires (NE-based), or with the type of semantic role that the question needs
as an answer (SR-based)9 .
Due to the modularity of the QA system, in this evaluation, only the NE-based answer extraction is used. As a baseline, using a subset of factual questions, extracted from
TREC1999 and TREC2000 that are NE oriented, the authors evaluated the system and
found 87.50% precision, 84% recall, 85.70% F and 87.25% MRR (Moreda, Llorens, Saquete,
& Palomar, 2008b).
The evaluation performed in this work is divided into two experiments:
1. Base QA system evaluation: First the QA system is evaluated without using the
temporal layer.
2. Multilayered QA system evaluation: Then the QA system is evaluated when it performs with the temporal layer.
The main aim of this evaluation is to compare the results of the two experiments and
determine if the temporal layer enhances a general purpose QA system like the one used
in this case. Besides, for both experiments, the 200 temporal question corpus created for
this purpose containing simple (Type 1 and Type 2) and complex (Type 3 and Type 4)
questions is used.
The results obtained by the general purpose QA system without the temporal layer are
shown in Table 6.
Table 6: Evaluation of the QA system for English temporal questions
POS

ACT

CORR

INE

PREC

REC

F

MRR

Type 1

50

50

35

0

70.00%

70.00%

70.00%

77.60%

Type 2

50

45

23

1

51.11%

46.00%

48.42%

48.00%

Type 3

50

8

1

0

12.50%

2.00%

3.45%

3.00%

Type 4

50

18

2

0

11.11%

4.00%

5.88%

5.00%

GLOBAL

200

121

32

1

50.41%

30.50%

38.01%

33.40%

The results obtained by the system enhanced with the temporal layer are shown in Table
7.
9. http://gplsi.dlsi.ua.es/demos/TMQA/

794

fiEnhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal Question Processing Capabilities

Table 7: Evaluation of QA system plus temporal layer for English temporal questions
POS

ACT

CORR

INE

PREC

REC

F

MRR

Type 1

50

50

35

0

70.00%

70.00%

70.00%

77.60%

Type 2

50

47

38

1

80.85%

76.00%

78.35%

78.00%

Type 3

50

48

29

2

60.42%

58.00%

59.18%

63.66%

Type 4

50

46

26

2

56.52%

52.00%

54.17%

55.66%

GLOBAL

200

191

128

5

67.02%

64.00%

65.47%

68.73%

As shown in both tables, the QA system enhanced with the temporal layer offers better
results in all measures (72.24% improvement in F and 33.58% error reduction in F). The
most outstanding improvements occur in complex temporal questions, due to the extra
reasoning that the temporal layer applies to find a candidate answer. Moreover, an extra
experiment, with manually corrected temporal expression identification and normalization,
is performed. Obviously, only questions Type 3 and 4 are affected and improved. Results
are shown in Table 8.
Table 8: Evaluation of QA system plus temporal layer for English temporal questions with
manually corrected TERN
POS

ACT

CORR

INE

PREC

REC

F

MRR

Type 1

50

50

35

0

70.00%

70.00%

70.00%

77.60%

Type 2

50

48

40

1

83.33%

80.00%

81.63%

82.00%

Type 3

50

48

30

2

62.50%

60.00%

61.22%

65.66%

Type 4

50

46

26

2

56.52%

52.00%

54.17%

55.66%

GLOBAL

200

192

131

5

68.22%

65.50%

66.83%

70.23%

A graphical comparison of the results for each type of question is shown in Figure 5. It is
very clear that the Multilayered QA system enhances the performance of the QA system in
all the types of questions except Type 1 (simple factual temporal questions), since this type
of question is processed in the same way by both systems. For the other types, precision,
recall, F-measure and MRR are improved, especially in the case of Type 3 and Type 4
questions, in which the base QA system is almost incapable of answering these questions
properly. The system gave very few inexact answers since the questions need short answers
consisting only of an NE or TE.
Some interesting examples that have been analyzed are shown in Figure 6.
In the first example, the question is a Type 2 question, which contains an implicit
temporal expression 16 years ago. The question is processed by both systems, but with
the important difference that the Multilayered QA system is able to process the temporal
expression and normalize the expression to a concrete date, in this case 1992. Once this
preprocessing of the temporal expression is done, the question is processed by the Base QA
system as Where were the Olympics held in 1992?, allowing the system to find the correct
answer. Without this preprocessing of the temporal layer, the Base QA system returns the
795

fiSaquete, Vicedo, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Llorens

F

MRR

80%

80%

70%

70%

60%

60%

50%

50%

40%

Q.A.

40%

Q.A.

30%

M.Q.A

30%

M.Q.A.

20%

20%

10%

10%

0%

0%
Type 1

Type 2

Type 3

Type 4

Type 1

(a) F-measure comparison

Type 2

Type 3

Type 4

(b) MRR comparison

Figure 5: Comparative graphics between Base QA system and Multilayered QA system
Who was the Indian Prime Minister
when the Black Panthers was founded?

Where were the Olympics held 16 years ago?
Type 2

Base Q.A.
system

Type 4

Multilayered
Q.A. system

Base Q.A.
system

16 years ago
= 1992

Beijing
(Wrong)

Multilayered
Q.A. system
Q-R=1996
T.S.=when

Barcelona
(OK)

H.Rap Brown
(Wrong)

(a) Example 1

Indira Gandhi
(OK)

(b) Example 2

Figure 6: Examples of Multilayered QA system performance
most popular answer, which corresponds to the last Olympic games in Beijing, and therefore
fails to answer the question correctly.
In the second example, the question is a Type 4 complex question and is again processed
by both systems. Since the Base QA system is not able to reason the second part of the
question and simply uses the keywords in the question, only the Multilayered QA system
returns a correct answer, taking as a restriction the date when the event in the second part
of the questions occurred.
To conclude, this study demonstrates that including this type of layer can help general purpose QA systems to resolve questions that are more complex than simple factual
questions, without changing the implementation of the general QA system.
6.2.3 Comparison with other QA systems
In order to compare our results with those of another QA system, we carried out the above
test with the widely known START QA system (Katz, 1990, 1997), which is available on
the Internet10 . The results obtained with the START system and those obtained by our
10. http://start.csail.mit.edu/

796

fiEnhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal Question Processing Capabilities

QA system enhanced with the temporal layer are shown and compared in Table 9. Both
are general purpose QA systems using Internet as corpus.
Table 9: Our QA system plus temporal layer compared to START QA system
QA + temp layer

START

PREC

REC

F

MRR

PREC

REC

F

MRR

Type 1

70.00%

70.00%

70.00%

77.60%

85.71%

24.00%

37.50%

24.00%

Type 2

80.85%

76.00%

78.35%

78.00%

75.00%

6.00%

11.11%

7.00%

Type 3

60.42%

58.00%

59.18%

63.66%

00.00%

00.00%

00.00%

00.00%

Type 4

56.52%

52.00%

54.17%

55.66%

00.00%

00.00%

00.00%

00.00%

GLOBAL

67.02%

64.00%

65.47%

68.73%

83.33%

7.50%

13.76%

7.75%

The START QA system was only able to answer Types 1 and Type 2 questions. Although, the precision achieved by this system with these types of questions is high, the recall
is lower, specially for Type 2 questions (6.00%). Focusing on complex temporal questions
(Types 2, 3 and 4), our QA system, which uses temporal information, can be seen to obtain
better results than the START QA, which does not use a temporal layer. In conclusion,
these results show that the application of a temporal layer improves QA results for complex
temporal questions. Concretely, considering the overall results, the QA system using the
temporal layer exceeds the START system by a 375.79% as regards the F-measure (48.36%
error reduction).
6.3 Portability to Other Languages: The Spanish Approach
As said before, the system was initially developed for English but was extended to Spanish
as well. Since the task performed by the layer that processes complex questions is language
dependent, some adaptation of the system was required: (1) TERSEO for Spanish was
used, (2) all the temporal signals stored in the system were translated into Spanish, (3) the
question splitter module was adapted to build grammatically correct Spanish Cuando
(When) questions.
6.3.1 Decomposition Unit Evaluation for Spanish
The results of the evaluation are shown in Table 10.

Table 10: Evaluation of the system for Spanish
POS

ACT

TE Identification and Normalization

100

90

82

91.1%

82.0%

86.3%

Type Identification

200

200

189

94.5%

94.5%

94.5%

Signal Detection

100

99

97

97.9%

97.0%

97.4%

Question Splitter

100

100

93

93.0%

93.0%

93.0%

200

190

174

91.5%

87.0%

89.2%

DECOMPOSITION UNIT

797

CORR

PREC

REC

F

fiSaquete, Vicedo, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Llorens

Briefly, in the evaluation for Spanish, 174 out of a total of 200 questions were properly
processed and decomposed in all aspects (TE identification, type identification, temporal
signal detection and splitting, if necessary), which means an F-measure of 89.2% for the
whole decomposition process. The best results were obtained by the Signal Detection module (F-measure almost 100%), but the results for Question Splitting and Type Identification
(F-measure around 93-94%) and TE Identification and Normalization were also quite good
(F-measure around 86%).
The main errors were very similar to the English ones. However, some new problems
appeared in Spanish (see Appendix B for details), principally produced by:
 Grammatical errors in the transformation of the second question due to the ambiguity
of some words that produces an incorrect POS-tagging. For example: in the expression
el cometa Hale (the Hale comet), the POSTAGGER classifies cometa (comet) as
a verb rather than a noun, which would be the appropriate tag in this case.
 Temporal expressions like el ano 99 or el 99 (year 99), which in Spanish refer
to 1999 in this case, are detected but not resolved. The same problem appears other
expressions containing non explicit numeric temporal expressions, i.e. el siglo XIX
(XIX century), el segundo milenio (second millennium) or the less common
word-spelled dates mil novecientos noventa y ocho (one thousand nine hundred
ninety eight) are not successfully processed by the temporal layer.
 Finally, in questions where the temporal signal is complex, such as: un ano despues
de que...(a year after...), both signal detection and question splitting are wrong
because this type of complex signal is outside the scope of the system.
6.3.2 Evaluating the influence of the temporal processing in QA systems
for Spanish
For this evaluation, the QA system described (Moreda et al., 2008a) was adapted to the
Spanish language. As in English, we used the NE-based answer extraction module.
We divided the Spanish evaluation into two experiments, as in the English evaluation:
1. Base QA system evaluation: First the adapted QA system is evaluated without using
the temporal layer.
2. Multilayered QA system evaluation: Then the adapted QA system is evaluated when
it performs with the temporal layer.
The main aim of this evaluation is to analyze whether the temporal layer can be successfully extended to other languages and deal with other language QA system, like the
Spanish-adapted QA system in this case. The 200 temporal question corpus created for the
English test were manually translated into Spanish and used in both experiments.
The results obtained by the general purpose Spanish QA system without the temporal
layer are shown in Table 11.
The results obtained by the system that has been enhanced with the temporal layer are
shown in Table 12.
798

fiEnhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal Question Processing Capabilities

Table 11: Evaluation of QA system for Spanish temporal questions
POS

ACT

CORR

INE

PREC

REC

F

MRR

Type 1

50

35

20

1

57.14%

40.00%

47.06%

45.34%

Type 2

50

37

12

0

32.43%

24.00%

27.59%

29.06%

Type 3

50

3

0

0

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

Type 4

50

4

0

0

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

GLOBAL

200

79

32

1

40.51%

16.00%

22.94%

18.60%

Table 12: Evaluation of QA system plus temporal layer for Spanish temporal questions
POS

ACT

CORR

INE

PREC

REC

F

MRR

Type 1

50

35

20

1

57.14%

40.00%

47.06%

45.34%

Type 2

50

40

19

0

47.50%

38.00%

42.22%

45.96%

Type 3

50

31

15

1

48.39%

30.00%

37.04%

37.00%

Type 4

50

31

14

1

45.16%

28.00%

34.57%

34.00%

GLOBAL

200

137

68

3

49.64%

34.00%

40.36%

40.58%

These results for Spanish show, as expected and already proven in the English case,
that: a) the QA system enhanced with the temporal layer gives better results in all measures (79.42% improvement in F and 22.60% error reduction in F), and b) the temporal layer
is easily extensible to other languages. The final global results are worst than the English
approach with this QA system, but this is due to the fact that the baseline results for the
Spanish QA system are also worst compared with the English QA system (F-English 38%
compared to F-Spanish 23%). In addition, as in the English experiments, an extra experiment with manually corrected Spanish temporal expression identification and normalization
is performed and results are shown in Table 13.
Table 13: Evaluation of QA system plus temporal layer for Spanish temporal questions with
manually corrected TERN
POS

ACT

CORR

INE

PREC

REC

F

MRR

Type 1

50

35

20

1

57.14%

40.00%

47.06%

45.34%

Type 2

50

43

22

0

51.16%

44.00%

47.31%

51.96%

Type 3

50

31

15

1

48.39%

30.00%

37.04%

37.00%

Type 4

50

31

14

1

45.16%

28.00%

34.57%

34.00%

GLOBAL

200

140

71

3

50.71%

35.50%

41.76%

42.08%

Despite this fact, the Multilayered QA system enhances the performance of the Spanish
QA system in all the types of questions, even in the case of complex questions, for which the
Base Spanish QA system is unable to find any correct answer. There are very few inexact
799

fiSaquete, Vicedo, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Llorens

answers for Spanish as well, thus proving that the system usually obtains exact answers for
both languages.
To conclude this second evaluation analysis, extension of the evaluation to Spanish
corroborates the conclusions obtained in the English evaluation and also demonstrates that
the temporal layer improves the system in the same way regardless of the language.

7. Conclusions and Further Work
This study presents a multilayered temporal QA architecture that performs on a multilingual level, in this case English and Spanish. This system processes complex temporal
questions by splitting them into simple questions that can be answered by different types
of general purpose QA systems. In addition, the system performs a temporal reasoning of
the questions with temporal information.
The proposal consists in adding a new layer, on top of a current QA system, which has
two main features:
 Complex question decomposition. Questions are decomposed into simple events which
generate simple questions (sub-questions) by using the temporal signal that relates
the events. The first sub-question (Q-Focus) specifies the type of information the user
needs to find. The answer to the second sub-question (Q-Restriction) establishes the
temporal restrictions on the list of answers to the Q-Focus. The Q-Focus and the
Q-Restriction are the input of a QA system (any type of QA system could be used
here).
 Question recomposition. Answers to the Q-Focus and Q-Restriction, obtained from
the QA system, are filtered and compared in order to determine their temporal compatibility and construct the final complex answer.
Since the layer that processes complex questions uses lexical and syntactic rules (a
grammar), this task is language dependent. Initially, the decomposition unit was prepared
for English, but in a very general way. Extension of the system to Spanish was therefore very
simple (only some small changes were required), and the same applies to other languages.
In addition, the temporal reasoning of the system is performed by TERSEO, which is a
multilingual system (now working in Spanish, English, Catalan and Italian) that is easily
extensible to any European language.
For evaluation purposes, there were two aims: a) to determine if the decomposition unit
processes each type of question properly in order to obtain the appropriate simple factual
questions, and b) show how these techniques enhance a general purpose QA system. In order
to accomplish these aims, a test bed for English and Spanish was constructed, annotating
the question corpus with the correct results for both decomposition and QA tasks, and
determining the criteria establishing when a question has been properly decomposed and
answered.
The decomposition unit evaluation results for English and Spanish were very good for
complex questions (F-measure 89.5% for English and 89.2% for Spanish). When evaluating
the performance of the whole multilayered architecture, these results were compared with
those obtained by the base QA system without the temporal layer. Great improvement
800

fiEnhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal Question Processing Capabilities

was found, especially in the case of complex questions (Type 3 and 4), in which the base
system was not able to answer them at all (4.66% average F-measure for English and 0.00%
for Spanish). The multilayered QA system obtained an overall F-measure of approximately
65% for English and 40% for Spanish for all types of questions. Besides, the temporal layer
QA system was also compared with an online general purpose QA system called START,
demonstrating the difficulty encountered by these general purpose QA systems in answering
questions with complex temporal information or temporal relations.
Further work will be done along three main lines of research: 1) resolving the problems
detected in the temporal layer after the evaluation process, 2) adding a module to resolve
anaphoric co-reference in questions, 3) integrating the event and link information from
TIMEML schema (TimeML, 2008) in our system in order to extract a deeper understanding
of complex questions, 4) taking into consideration techniques to determine event durations
in case of open-ended questions, such as: What happened to world oil prices after the Iraqi
annexation of Kuwait?. For this task, previous work in the field will be considered (Pan
et al., 2006b), and 5) applying the layer procedure to other types of complex questions,
as well as studying the new features that need to be added to the system to enable it to
perform with other languages like Chinese.

Acknowledgments
This paper has been partially supported by the Spanish government, project TIN-200615265-C06-01, and by the framework of the project QALL-ME, which is a 6th Framework
Research Programme of the European Union (EU), contract number: FP6-IST-033860.

Appendix A. Question Decomposition Error Analysis for English
This appendix gives detailed information on the decomposition errors detected in the test
for the English language. As shown in Table 5 we distinguish TE identification and normalization, type identification, signal detection and question splitter errors. In Table 14
we specify which questions in the English testbed correspond to which error types. The
questions in bold correspond to more than one type of error.
Table 14: Question Decomposition Error Analysis for English
Error type
TE Identification and Normalization

testbed question
81, 83, 89, 92, 97, 98, 99, 102, 108, 112, 114, 115, 116, 117,
126, 129, 133, 135, 142, 148

Type Identification

97, 98, 108, 129, 135, 148

Signal Detection

101, 114, 116, 129

Question Splitter

101, 110, 114, 116, 129, 142, 179, 192

The questions implied are listed below. Only erroneous elements are listed and the correct
values are indicated in brackets.
<Q id=81> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)

801

fiSaquete, Vicedo, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Llorens

<QUESTION>Who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 91?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>91</TE> (CORR value=1991)
</Q>
<Q id=83> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>What tennis player did win Wimbledon women singles in the second millennium year?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>year</TE>(CORR <TE value=2000>second millennium year</TE>)
</Q>
<Q id=89> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>How many planes crashed into Twin Towers in 01?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>01</TE> (CORR value=2001)
</Q>
<Q id=92> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>What organization was founded in 75 by Bill Gates?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>75 by</TE> (CORR <TE value=1975>75</TE>)
</Q>
<Q id=97> (ACT: No CORR: No)
<QUESTION>What city was the capital of Nicaragua in eighteen fifty-five?</QUESTION>
<TE value=></TE> (CORR <TE value=1855>eighteen fifty-five</TE>)
<TYPE>1</TYPE> (CORR <TYPE>2</TYPE>)
</Q>
<Q id=98> (ACT: No CORR: No)
<QUESTION>What was the largest city in Italy in the 17th century?</QUESTION>
<TE value=></TE> (CORR <TE value=16>the 17th century</TE>)
<TYPE>1</TYPE> (CORR <TYPE>2</TYPE>)
</Q>
<Q id=99> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Where was Eurovision held in 68?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>68</TE> (CORR value=1968)
</Q>
<Q id=101> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Who was the Prime Minister of Spain four years after Jose Maria Aznar presided Spain between
2000 and 2004?</QUESTION>
<SIGNAL>after</SIGNAL> (CORR <SIGNAL>four years after</SIGNAL>)
<Q-FOCUS>Who was the Prime Minister of Spain four years?</Q-FOCUS>
(CORR <Q-FOCUS>Who was the Prime Minister of Spain?</Q-FOCUS>)
</Q>
<Q id=102> (ACT: No CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Who was the king of Spain after Charles III died in the 1780s?</QUESTION>
<TE value=></TE> (CORR <TE value=178>the 1780s</TE>)
</Q>
<Q id=108> (ACT: No CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Who was the president of the US when the AARP was founded five decades ago?</QUESTION>
<TE value=></TE>(CORR <TE value=195>five decades ago</TE>)
<TYPE>4</TYPE> (CORR <TYPE>3</TYPE>)
</Q>
<Q id=110> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Who was the Prime Minister of Spain just after the Columbia first flight in the 1980s?</QUESTION>
<Q-FOCUS>Who was the Prime Minister of Spain just?</Q-FOCUS>
(CORR <Q-FOCUS>Who was the Prime Minister of Spain?</Q-FOCUS>)
</Q>
<Q id=112> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>How many members had the European Union when Gladiator was released in 00?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>00</TE> (CORR <TE value=2000>00</TE>)

802

fiEnhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal Question Processing Capabilities

</Q>
<Q id=114> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>What company introduced onto the market a seat with adjustable shoulder support a year before
Mariah Carey was born in the 1960s?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>the 1960s</TE> (CORR <TE value=196>the 1960s</TE>)
<SIGNAL>before</SIGNAL> (CORR <SIGNAL>a year before</SIGNAL>)
<Q-FOCUS>What company introduced onto the market a seat with adjustable shoulder support a year?</QFOCUS>
(CORR <Q-FOCUS>What company introduced onto the market a seat with adjustable shoulder support?</QFOCUS>)
</Q>
<Q id=115> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Which language was forbidden in Spain during Francos Dictatorship period 1939-1975?</QUESTION>
<TE value=1975>1939-1975</TE>
(CORR <TE value=1939-1975>1939-1975</TE>)
</Q>
<Q id=116> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>When did Indurain win the Tour a year after the Shawshank Redemption film was released in the
1990s?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>the 1990s</TE> (CORR <TE value=199>the 1990s</TE>)
<SIGNAL>after</SIGNAL> (CORR <SIGNAL>a year after</SIGNAL>)
<Q-FOCUS>When did Indurain win the Tour a year?</Q-FOCUS>
(CORR <Q-FOCUS>When did Indurain win the Tour?</Q-FOCUS>)
</Q>
<Q id=117> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>When did Vesuvius erupt before Sinclair Lewis won Literature Nobel Prize in 1930s?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>1930s</TE> (CORR <TE value=193>1930s</TE>)
</Q>
<Q id=126> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Who died on a plane crash when Vietnam war was started in late 1960s?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>1960s</TE> (CORR <TE value=1965-1969>late 1960s</TE>)
</Q>
<Q id=129> (ACT: No CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Who was the king of Spain after Charles IV reigned Spain during the eighteenth century?</QUESTION>
<TE value=></TE> (CORR <TE value=17>eighteenth century</TE>)
<TYPE>4</TYPE> (CORR <TYPE>3</TYPE>)
<SIGNAL>during</SIGNAL> (CORR <SIGNAL>after</SIGNAL>)
<Q-FOCUS>Who was the king of Spain after Charles IV reigned Spain?</Q-FOCUS>
(CORR <Q-FOCUS>Who was the king of Spain?</Q-FOCUS>)
<Q-REST>When did the eighteenth century happen?</Q-REST>
(CORR <Q-REST>When did Charles IV reign Spain during the eighteenth century?</Q-REST>)
</Q>
<Q id=133> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>What person won the Literature Nobel Prize when James Dean was born in 31?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>31</TE> (CORR value=1931)
</Q>
<Q id=135> (ACT: No CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Who was the prime minister of the United Kingdom when the AARP was founded five decades
ago?</QUESTION>
<TE value=></TE> (CORR <TE value=195>five decades ago</TE>)
<TYPE>4</TYPE> (CORR <TYPE>3</TYPE>)
</Q>
<Q id=142> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Which language was invented by Zamenhof when Berliner patented the Gramophone in the 1880s?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>the 1880s</TE> (CORR <TE value=188>the 1880s</TE>)

803

fiSaquete, Vicedo, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Llorens

<Q-REST>When did Berliner patented the Gramophone in the 1880s happen?</Q-REST>
(CORR <Q-REST>When did Berliner patent the Gramophone in the 1880s?</Q-REST>)
</Q>
<Q id=148> (ACT: No CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Where was the Woodstock Festival held on August 15 when Unix was developed?</QUESTION>
<TE value=></TE> (CORR <TE value=XXXX-08-15>August 15</TE>)
<TYPE>4</TYPE> (CORR <TYPE>3</TYPE>)
</Q>
<Q id=179> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Who was the king of Spain after Charles IV reigned Spain?</QUESTION>
<Q-REST>When did Charles IV reign Spain happen?</Q-REST>
(CORR <Q-REST>When did Charles IV reign Spain?</Q-REST>)
</Q>
<Q id=192> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Which language was invented by Zamenhof when Berliner patented the Gramophone?</QUESTION>
<Q-REST>When did Berliner patented the Gramophone happen?</Q-REST>
(CORR <Q-REST>When did Berliner patent the Gramophone?</Q-REST>)
</Q>

Appendix B. Question Decomposition Error Analysis for Spanish
This appendix gives detailed information on the decomposition errors detected in the test
for the Spanish language (see table 10)
. In Table 15 we specify which questions correspond to which error types. The questions in
bold correspond to more than one type of error.
Table 15: Question decomposition error analysis for Spanish
Error type

testbed question

TE Identification and Normalization

81, 83, 89, 92, 97, 98, 99, 108, 114, 116, 129, 130, 133, 135,
142, 143, 145, 148

Type Identification

2, 6, 9, 31, 45, 81, 97, 98, 108, 129, 135

Signal Detection

114, 116, 129

Question Splitter

105, 110, 114, 116, 129, 133, 155

The questions implied are listed below. Only erroneous elements are listed and the correct
values are indicated in brackets.
<Q id=2> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Durante que decada fue inventado el test del polgrafo?</QUESTION>
<TYPE>2</TYPE> (CORR <TYPE>1</TYPE>)
</Q>
<Q id=6> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>En que ano fue lanzado el submarino Nautilus?</QUESTION>
<TYPE>2</TYPE> (CORR <TYPE>1</TYPE>)
</Q>
<Q id=9> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)

804

fiEnhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal Question Processing Capabilities

<QUESTION>En que ano entro en vigor la enmienda 18?</QUESTION>
<TYPE>2</TYPE> (CORR <TYPE>1</TYPE>)
</Q>
<Q id=31> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Que ano volaron los Wright Brothers por primera vez?</QUESTION>
<TYPE>2</TYPE> (CORR <TYPE>1</TYPE>)
</Q>
<Q id=45> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Que ano fue el gran Incendio de Londres?</QUESTION>
<TYPE>2</TYPE> (CORR <TYPE>1</TYPE>)
</Q>
<Q id=81> (ACT: No CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Quien gano el Nobel de la Paz en el 91?</QUESTION>
<TE value=></TE> (CORR <TE value=1991>el 91</TE>)
<TYPE>1</TYPE> (CORR <TYPE>2</TYPE>)
</Q>
<Q id=83> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Que jugador de tenis gano Wimbledon mujeres individuales en el ano del segundo milenio?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>el ano</TE>
(CORR <TE value=2000>en el ano del segundo milenio</TE>)
</Q>
<Q id=89> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Cuantos aviones chocaron en las Torres Gemelas en el 01?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>el 01</TE> (CORR value=2001)
</Q>
<Q id=92> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Que empresa fue fundada en el 75 por Bill Gates?</QUESTION>
<TE value=2008>el 75</TE> (CORR value=1975)
</Q>
<Q id=97> (ACT: No CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Que ciudad fue la capital de Nicaragua en mil ochocientos cincuenta y cinco?</QUESTION>
<TE value=></TE> (CORR <TE value=1855>mil ochocientos cincuenta y cinco</TE>)
<TYPE>1</TYPE> (CORR <TYPE>2</TYPE>)
</Q>
<Q id=98> (ACT: No CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Cual fue la ciudad mas grande de Italia en el siglo XVII?</QUESTION>
<TE value=></TE> (CORR <TE value=16>el siglo XVII</TE>)
<TYPE>1</TYPE> (CORR <TYPE>2</TYPE>)
</Q>
<Q id=99> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Donde se celebro Eurovision en el ano 68?</QUESTION>
<TE value=2008>el ano 68</TE> (CORR value=1968)
</Q>
<Q id=105> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Quien gano el Nobel de Fsica cuando el cometa Hale Bopp fue descubierto hace 13 anos?</QUESTION>
<Q-REST>Cuando cometio el Hale Bopp fue descubierto hace 13 anos?</Q-REST>
(CORR <Q-REST>Cuando fue descubierto el cometa Hale Bopp hace 13 anos?</Q-REST>)
</Q>
<Q id=108> (ACT: No CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Quien fue el presidente de los Estados Unidos cuando se fundo AARP hace cinco decadas?</QUESTION>
<TE value=></TE> (CORR <TE value=195>hace cinco decadas </TE>)
<TYPE>4</TYPE> (CORR <TYPE>3</TYPE>)
</Q>

805

fiSaquete, Vicedo, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Llorens

<Q id=110> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Quien fue el Presidente de Espana justo despues de que se produjera el primer vuelo del Columbia
en los anos 80?</QUESTION>
<Q-REST>Cuando se produjo se el primer vuelo del Columbia en los anos 80?</Q-REST>
(CORR <Q-REST>Cuando se produjo el primer vuelo del Columbia en los anos 80?</Q-REST>)
</Q>
<Q id=114> (ACT: No CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Que empresa introdujo en el mercado el primer asiento con respaldo regulable un ano antes de
que naciera Mariah Carey en los anos 60?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>un ano antes</TE> (CORR <TE value=196>los anos 60</TE>)
<SIGNAL>antes de que</SIGNAL>
(CORR <SIGNAL>un ano antes de que</SIGNAL>)
<Q-FOCUS>Que empresa introdujo en el mercado el primer asiento con respaldo regulable un ano?</Q-FOCUS>
(CORR <Q-FOCUS>Que empresa introdujo en el mercado el primer asiento con respaldo regulable?</QFOCUS>)
</Q>
<Q id=116> (ACT: No CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Cuando gano Indurain el Tour un ano despues de que se estrenara Cadena Perpetua en los anos
90?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>un ano despues</TE> (CORR <TE value=199>los anos 90</TE>)
<SIGNAL>despues de que</SIGNAL>
(CORR <SIGNAL>un ano despues de que</SIGNAL>)
<Q-FOCUS>Cuando gano Indurain el Tour un ano?</Q-FOCUS>
(CORR <Q-FOCUS>Cuando gano Indurain el Tour?</Q-FOCUS>)
</Q>
<Q id=129> (ACT: No CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Quien fue el Rey de Espana despues de que Carlos IV reinara Espana durante el siglo XVIII?</QUESTION>
<TE value=></TE> (CORR <TE value=17>el siglo XVIII</TE>)
<TYPE>4</TYPE> (CORR <TYPE>3</TYPE>)
<SIGNAL>durante</SIGNAL> (CORR <SIGNAL>despues</SIGNAL>)
<Q-REST>Cuando fue el siglo XVIII?</Q-REST>
(CORR <Q-REST>Cuando reino Carlos IV Espana durante el siglo XVIII?</Q-REST>)
</Q>
<Q id=130> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Quien gano Wimbledon femenino individuales antes de que Rafa Nadal ganara Wimbledon este
ano?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>este ano</TE> (CORR <TE value=2008>este ano</TE>)
</Q>
<Q id=133> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Que persona gano el premio Nobel de Literatura cuando James Dean nacio en el ano 31?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>el ano 31</TE> (CORR value=1931)
<Q-REST>Cuando jamo Dean nacio en el ano 31?</Q-REST>
(CORR <Q-REST>Cuando nacio James Dean en el ano 31?</Q-REST>)
</Q>
<Q id=135> (ACT: No CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Quien fue el Presidente de Reino Unido cuando AARP fue fundada hace cinco decadas?</QUESTION>
<TE value=></TE> (CORR <TE value=195>hace cinco decadas</TE>)
<TYPE>3</TYPE> (CORR <TYPE>4</TYPE>)
</Q>
<Q id=142> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Que lengua fue inventada por Zamenhof cuando Berliner patento el disco de vinilo en la decada
de 1880?</QUESTION>
<TE value=1880>1880</TE>
(CORR <TE value=188>la decada de 1880</TE>)
</Q>

806

fiEnhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal Question Processing Capabilities

<Q id=143> (ACT: No CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Donde se celebraran las Olimpiadas cuando Polonia adopte el Euro en la decada de 2010?</QUESTION>
<TE value=></TE> (CORR <TE value=201>la decada de 2010</TE>)
</Q>
<Q id=145> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Cuando gano Gary Becker el premio Nobel de Economa antes de que Zapatero fuera elegido
Presidente de Espana en los ultimos anos?</QUESTION>
<TE value=>los ultimos anos</TE> (CORR value=[2003-2008])
</Q>
<Q id=148> (ACT: No CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Donde se celebro el Festival de Woodstock el 15 de agosto cuando el Unix fue desarrollado?</QUESTION>
<TE value=></TE> (CORR <TE value=XXXX-08-15>el 15 de agosto</TE>)
</Q>
<Q id=155> (ACT: Yes CORR: No)
<QUESTION>Quien gano el Nobel de Fsica cuando el cometa Hale Bopp fue descubierto?</QUESTION>
<Q-REST>Cuando cometio el Hale Bopp fue descubierto?</Q-REST>
(CORR <Q-REST>Cuando fue descubierto el cometa Hale Bopp?</Q-REST>)
</Q>

References
ACL (2001). Association for computational linguistics. http://www.aclweb.org/.
Ahn, D. (2006). The stages of event extraction. In for Computational Linguistics, A.
(Ed.), ARTE: Workshop of 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pp. 18, Sydney, Australia.
ATEL (2008). Computational Language and Education Research. University of Colorado.
http://timex2.mitre.org/taggers/timex2 taggers.html.
Barzilay, R., Elhadad, N., & McKeown, K. (2002). Inferring strategies for sentence ordering
in multidocument news summarization. J. Artif. Intell. Res. (JAIR), 17, 3555.
Breck, E., Burger, J., Ferro, L., Greiff, W., Light, M., Mani, I., & Rennie, J. (2000). Another
Sys Called Quanda. In Ninth Text REtrieval Conference, Vol. 500-249 of NIST Special
Publication, pp. 369378. National Institute of Standards and Technology.
CLEF (2008). Cross Language Evaluation Forum. http://www.clef-campaign.org/.
COLING (2000).
18th international
http://coling.dfki.de/.

conference

on

computational

linguistics.

COLING-ACL (2006). 44th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics.
http://www.aclweb.org/mirror/acl2006/.
Dalli, A., & Wilks, Y. (2006). Annotating Dating of Documents and Temporal Text Classification. In for Computational Linguistics, A. (Ed.), ARTE: Workshop of 44th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 1122, Sydney, Australia.
Demri, S., & Jensen, C. S. (Eds.). (2008). 15th International Symposium on Temporal
Representation and Reasoning, Vol. 15 of TIME symposium. IEEE Computer Society.
807

fiSaquete, Vicedo, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Llorens

Filatova, E., & Hovy, E. (2001). Assigning Time-Stamps to Event-Clauses. In Proceedings of
the 2001 ACL Workshop on Temporal and Spatial Information Processing, pp. 8895.
Harabagiu, S., Lacatusu, F., & Hickl, A. (2006). Answering complex questions with random
walk models. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp. 220227.
Herrera, J., Penas, A., & Verdejo, F. (2005). Question answering pilot task at CLEF 2004.
In Peters, C., Clough, P., Gonzalo, J., Jones, G. J., Kluck, M., & Magnini, B. (Eds.),
Berlin Heidelberg New York, Vol. 3491 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp.
581590. Springer-Verlag.
Katz, B. (1990). Using English for indexing and retrieving. Artificial intelligence at MIT
expanding frontiers, 1, 134165.
Katz, B. (1997). Annotating the World Wide Web using Natural Language. In Proceedings
of the 5th RIAO Conference on Computer Assisted Information Searching on the
Internet.
Katz, B., Borchardt, G., & Felshin, S. (2005). Syntactic and semantic decomposition strategies for question ansering from multiple resources. In Proceedings of the AAAI 2005
Workshop on Inference for Textual Question Answering, pp. 3541.
Katz, G., & Arosio, F. (2001). The Annotation of Temporal Information In Natural Language Sentences. In Proceedings of the 2001 ACL Workshop on Temporal and Spatial
Information Processing, pp. 104111.
Katz, G., Pustejovsky, J., & Schilder, F. (2005). Annotating, Extracting and Reasoning
about
Time
and
Events.
http://www.dagstuhl.de/en/programm/kalender/semhp/?semnr=05151.
Lapata, M., & Lascarides, A. (2006). Learning Sentence-internal Temporal Relations. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 27, 85117.
Lin, C.-J., & Liu, R.-R. (2008). An Analysis of Multi-Focus Questions. In Proceedings of
the SIGIR 2008 Workshop on Focused Retrieval, pp. 3036.
LREC (2002). Proceedings of the LREC Workshop on Temporal Annotation Standards.
http://www.lrec-conf.org/lrec2002/.
Magnini, B., Giampiccolo, D., Forner, P., Ayache, C., Jijkoun, V., Osenova, P., Penas,
A.,
Rocha,
P.,
Sacaleanu,
B.,
& Sutcliffe, R. (2006). Overview of the CLEF 2006 Multilingual Question Answering
Track. http://www.clef-campaign.org/2006/working notes/workingnotes2006/
magniniOCLEF2006.pdf.
Magnini, B., Vallin, A., Ayache, C., Erbach, G., Penas, A., de Rijke, M., Rocha, P., Simov,
K., & Sutcliffe, R. (2005). Overview of the CLEF 2004 Multilingual Question Answering Track. In Peters, C., Clough, P., Gonzalo, J., Jones, G. J., Kluck, M., & Magnini,
B. (Eds.), Berlin Heidelberg New York, Vol. 3491 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 371391. Springer-Verlag.
Mani, I., & Wellner, B. (2006). A Pilot Study on Acquiring Metric Temporal Constraints
for Events. In for Computational Linguistics, A. (Ed.), ARTE: Workshop of 44th
808

fiEnhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal Question Processing Capabilities

Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2329, Sydney,
Australia.
Mani, I., & Wilson, G. (2000a). Processing of news. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL2000), pp. 6976.
Mani, I., & Wilson, G. (2000b). Robust temporal processing of news. In ACL (Ed.),
Proceedings of the 38th Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL
2000), Hong Kong.
Mani, I., & Wilson, G. (2002). Annotation Standards for Temporal Information in Natural
Language. In Proceedings of the LREC Workshop on Temporal Annotation Standards.
Mazur, P., & Dale, R. (2007). The DANTE temporal expression tagger. In Proceedings of
the 3rd Language and Technology Conference.
Michelson, M., & Knoblock, C. A. (2008). Creating Relational Data from Unstructured and
Ungrammatical Data Sources. J. Artif. Intell. Res. (JAIR), 31, 543590.
Moia, T. (2001). Telling apart temporal locating adverbials and time-denoting expressions.
In Proceedings of the 2001 ACL Workshop on Temporal and Spatial Information Processing.
Moreda, P., Llorens, H., Saquete, E., & Palomar, M. (2008a). Automatic generalization
of a QA answer extraction module based on semantic roles. In 11th edition of the
Ibero-American Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IBERAMIA 2008), Advances
in Artificial Intelligence. Springer-Verlag LNAI.
Moreda, P., Llorens, H., Saquete, E., & Palomar, M. (2008b). The influence of Semantic
Roles in QA: A comparative analysis. In XXIV edicion del Congreso Anual de la
Sociedad Espanola para el Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural 2008 (SEPLN 08) .
Negri, M. (2007). Dealing with italian temporal expressions: The ITA-Chronos system. In
Proceedings of EVALITA 2007, Workshop held in conjunction with AI*IA.
Negri, M., Saquete, E., Martnez-Barco, P., & Munoz, R. (2006). Evaluating Knowledgebased Approaches to the Multilingual Extension of a Temporal Expression Normalizer.
In for Computational Linguistics, A. (Ed.), ARTE: Workshop of 44th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 3037, Sydney, Australia.
Palomar, M., Ferrandez, A., Moreno, L., Martnez-Barco, P., Peral, J., Saiz-Noeda, M., &
Munoz, R. (2001). An algorithm for anaphora resolution in Spanish text. Computational Linguistics, 27 (4), 545567.
Palomar, M., & Martnez-Barco, P. (2001). Computational approach to anaphora resolution
in Spanish dialogues. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 15 (4), 263287.
Pan, F., Mulkar, R., & Hobbs, J. (2006a). Learning Event Durations from Event Descriptions. In 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
393400.
Pan, F., Mulkar-Mehta, R., & Hobbs, J. R. (2006b). Learning Event Durations from Event
Descriptions. In ACL. The Association for Computer Linguistics.
Prager, J. M., Chu-Carroll, J., & Czuba, K. (2004). Question Answering Using Constraint
Satisfaction: QA-By-Dossier-With-Contraints. In ACL, pp. 574581.
809

fiSaquete, Vicedo, Martnez-Barco, Munoz, & Llorens

Pustejovsky, J. (2002). TERQAS: Time and Event Recognition for Question Answering
Systems. www.timeml.org/terqas/.
Pustejovsky, J., & Mani, I. (2008). TANGO: TimeML Annotation Graphical Organizer.
http://www.timeml.org/site/tango/index.html.
Radev,
D.,
&
Sundheim,
B. (2002). Using TimeML in question answering. http://www.cs.brandeis.edu/~
jamesp/arda/time/documentation/ TimeML-use-in-qa-v1.0.pdf.
Saquete, E., Martnez-Barco, P., & Munoz, R. (2002). Recognising and Tagging Temporal
Expressions in Spanish. In Proceedings of the LREC Workshop on Temporal Annotation Standards, pp. 4451.
Saquete, E., Martnez-Barco, P., Munoz, R., & Vicedo, J. (2004). Splitting Complex Temporal Questions for Question Answering systems. In ACL (Ed.), 42nd Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 566573, Barcelona, Espana.
Saquete, E., Munoz, R., & Martnez-Barco, P. (2006). Event Ordering using TERSEO
system. Data and Knowledge Engineering Journal, 58 (1), 7089.
Saur, R., Knippen, R., Verhagen, M., & Pustejovsky, J. (2005). EVITA: a robust event
recognizer for QA systems. In HLT 05: Proceedings of the conference on Human
Language Technology and Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
700707, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Schilder, F., & Habel, C. (2001). From Temporal Expressions to Temporal Information:
Semantic Tagging of News Messages. In Proceedings of the 2001 ACL Workshop on
Temporal and Spatial Information Processing, pp. 6572.
Setzer, A., & Gaizauskas, R. (2001). A Pilot Study On Annotating Temporal Relations In
Text. In Proceedings of the 2001 ACL Workshop on Temporal and Spatial Information
Processing.
Setzer, A., & Gaizauskas, R. (2002). On the Importance of Annotating Event-Event Temporal Relations in Text. In Proceedings of the LREC Workshop on Temporal Annotation
Standards, pp. 5260.
TempEx
(2008).
MITRE
http://timex2.mitre.org/taggers/timex2 taggers.html.
TERN
(2004).
Time
Expression
http://timex2.mitre.org/tern.html.

Recognition

Corporation.
and

Normalization.

TIME (2008). International Symposium on Temporal Representation and Reasoning.
http://time.dico.unimi.it/.
TimeML (2008).
Markup Language for Temporal
http://www.timeml.org/site/index.html.

and

Event

Expressions.

TREC (2008). Text REtrieval Conference. http://trec.nist.gov/.
Verhagen, M., Gaizauskas, R., Schilder, F., Hepple, M., Katz, G., & Pustejosvky, J. (2007).
Temeval-2007 task 15: Tempeval temporal relation identification. In Proceedings of
the 4th International Workshop of SemEval-2007, pp. 7580.
810

fiEnhancing QA Systems with Complex Temporal Question Processing Capabilities

Voorhees, E. M. (2002). Overview of the TREC 2002 Question Answering Track. In Eleventh
Text REtrieval Conference, Vol. 500-251 of NIST Special Publication, pp. 115123.
National Institute of Standards and Technology.
Wilson, G., Mani, I., Sundheim, B., & Ferro, L. (2001). A Multilingual Approach To
Annotating And Extracting Temporal Information. In Proceedings of the 2001 ACL
Workshop on Temporal and Spatial Information Processing, pp. 8187.

811

fi